DEEP LEARNING STUDY NOTES
All credits go to L. Fei-Fei, A. Karpathy, J.Johnson teachers
of the CS231n course. Thank you for this amazing course!!
by
Albert Pumarola

Contents
I DATA 7
1 Data Preprocessing 9
2 Making the most of your data - Data Augmentation and Transfer Learning 11
2.1 Data Augmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.2 Transfer Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
II LEARNING 15
3 Neural Network 17
4 Parameters Initialization 21
4.1 Weights . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2 Biases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5 Activation Function 25
5.1 Sigmoid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.2 Tanh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.3 ReLU . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
5.4 Leaky ReLU. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.5 ELU - Exponential Linear Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5.6 Maxout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6 Loss function 29
7 Backpropagation 33
8 Parameters Update 45
9 Dropout 53
10 Hyper-Parameters selection and babysitting 57
11 Other definitions 61
11.1 Embedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
11.2 Gradient Clipping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
11.3 Vanishing Gradient Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
12 Tricks 63
3

13 Visualization 65
13.1 t-SNE visualization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
13.2 Occlusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
13.3 Visualizing Activations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
13.4 Deconv approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
13.5 Optimization to image . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
13.6 Visualizing Data Gradients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
13.7 DeepDream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
13.8 DeepArt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
13.9 Adversarial data - Fooling networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
III LAYERS 73
14 Input Layer 75
15 Convolutional layer 77
16 Pooling layer 83
17 Batch Normalization layer 87
18 Upsampling Layer (“Transposed Convolution”) 91
19 Fully Connected Layer 93
20 Highway Layer 95
IV NETWORKS 97
21 Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) 99
21.1 LSTM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
21.1.1 Bidirectional RNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
22 Autoencoders 109
22.1 Traditional Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
22.2 Variational Autoencoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
23 Generative Adversarial Nets 115
24 Region Based CNN (R-CNN) 117
24.1 R-CNN (do not use this method, deprecated) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
24.2 Fast R-CNN (do not use this method, deprecated) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
24.3 Faster R-CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
25 YOLO 125
26 RNN ConvNet 127
27 Attention Models 131

28 Spatial Transformer Networks 135
29 Famous Networks 137
V Applications 143
30 Applications 145
30.1 Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
30.2 Classification + Localization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
30.3 Object Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
30.4 Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
30.4.1 Semantic Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
30.4.2 Instance Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152
30.5 Image captioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
Bibliography 155

Part I
DATA
7

Chapter 1
Data Preprocessing
There are different techniques used in learning in order to improve the accuracy of the model
by preprocessing the data:
There are three common forms of data preprocessing a data matrix X, where we will assume
that X is of size [N ×D] (N is the number of data, D is their dimensionality).
Figure 1.1: Preprocessing example 1
Figure 1.2: Preprocessing example 2
Mean subtraction Most common form of preprocessing. It involves subtracting the mean
across every individual feature in the data, and has the geometric interpretation of centring
the cloud of data around the origin along every dimension. In NumPy, this operation would
be implemented as: X -= np.mean(X, axis = 0). With images specifically, for convenience it
9

can be common to subtract a single value from all pixels (e.g. X -= np.mean(X)), or to do so
separately across the three color channels.
Normalization Refers to normalizing the data dimensions so that they are of approximately
the same scale. There are two common ways of achieving this normalization. One is to divide
each dimension by its standard deviation, once it has been zero-centered: (X /= np.std(X,
axis = 0)). Another form of this preprocessing normalizes each dimension so that the min and
maxalongthedimensionis-1and1respectively. Itonlymakessensetoapplythispreprocessing
if you have a reason to believe that different input features have different scales (or units), but
they should be of approximately equal importance to the learning algorithm. In case of images,
the relative scales of pixels are already approximately equal (and in range from 0 to 255), so it
is not strictly necessary to perform this additional preprocessing step.
PCA The reason why one would want to use PCA is if one expects that many of the features
are in fact dependent. This would be particularly handy for Naive Bayes where independence
is assumed. Most datasets are far too large to use PCA. Attention: PCA complexity is O(n3),
so more sophisticated methods are required. But if your dataset is small, and you don’t have
the time to investigate more sophisticated methods, then by all means go ahead and apply an
out-of-box PCA for feature selection.
Whitening Takes the data in the eigenbasis and divides every dimension by the eigenvalue
to normalize the scale. The geometric interpretation of this transformation is that if the input
data is a multi-variable Gaussian, then the whitened data will be a Gaussian with zero mean
and identity covariance matrix.
Deep Learning with images
For Deep Learning for images we will only use: center our data to zero. To do so, for each
pixel, compute its mean across all the dataset and subtract the resulting mean image to all the
training samples. If you have more than one channel (e.g. RGB) do it for each of the channels
separately.

Chapter 2
Making the most of your data - Data
Augmentation and Transfer Learning
2.1 Data Augmentation
Horizontal Flip
Figure 2.1: Horizontal flip. Flip image 180 degrees in the horizontal direction.
Random Crops/Scales
Figure 2.2: Random Crops/Scales
Training: sample random crops / scales
Specific example. How ResNet trains:
11

1. Pick random L in range [256, 480]
2. Resize training image, short side = L
3. Sample random 224 x 224 patch
Testing: average a fixed set of crops
Specific example. How ResNet tests:
1. Resize image at 5 scales: 224, 256, 384, 480, 640
2. For each size, use 10 224 x 224 crops: 4 corners + center, + flips
Color Jitter
Figure 2.3: Color Jitter
• Simple: Randomly jitter contrast
• Complex:
1. Apply PCA to all [R, G, B] pixels in training set
2. Sample a color offset along principal component directions
3. Add offset to all pixels of a training image
Get Creative
At the end you have to think for your specific case, what transformations you want to be robust
to and add them to the training set: translation, rotation, stretching, shearing, lens distortions,
...

2.2 Transfer Learning
In practice, very few people train an entire Deep Network from scratch (with random initializa-
tion), because it is relatively rare to have a dataset of sufficient size. Instead, it is common to
pretrain a ConvNet on a very large dataset (e.g. ImageNet, which contains 1.2 million images
with 1000 categories), and then use the ConvNet either as an initialization or a fixed feature
extractor for the task of interest. Pretrained DeepNets are usually trained with large computer
clustersanddownloadedbyothers. ThethreemajorTransferLearningscenarioslookasfollows:
ConvNet as fixed feature extractor Take a ConvNet pretrained on ImageNet, remove the
last fully-connected layer (this layers outputs are the 1000 class scores for a different task like
ImageNet), then treat the rest of the ConvNet as a fixed feature extractor for the new dataset.
InanAlexNet,thiswouldcomputea4096-Dvectorforeveryimagethatcontainstheactivations
of the hidden layer immediately before the classifier. We call these features CNN codes.
Fine-tuning the ConvNet The second strategy is not only to replace and retrain the classi-
fierontopoftheConvNetonthenewdataset,buttoalsofine-tunetheweightsofthepretrained
network by continuing the backpropagation. It is possible to fine-tune all the layers of the Con-
vNet, or its possible to keep some of the earlier layers fixed (due to overfitting concerns) and
only fine-tune some higher-level portion of the network. This is motivated by the observation
thattheearlierfeaturesofaConvNetcontainmoregenericfeatures(e.g. edgedetectorsorcolor
blob detectors) that should be useful to many tasks, but later layers of the ConvNet becomes
progressively more specific to the details of the classes contained in the original dataset. In case
of ImageNet for example, which contains many dog breeds, a significant portion of the repre-
sentational power of the ConvNet may be devoted to features that are specific to differentiating
between dog breeds.
Check points of pretrained models SincemodernConvNetstake 2-3weekstotrainacross
multiple GPUs on ImageNet, it is common to see people release their final ConvNet checkpoints
forthebenefitofotherswhocanusethenetworksforfine-tuning. Forexample, theCaffelibrary
has a Model Zoo where people share their network weights.
When and how to fine-tune?
IMPORTANT: When doing transfer learning if you make changes in the green and orange part
do the following:
• Train green, freeze everything else
• When green is starting to converge unfreeze the orange part that you want to modify

Figure 2.4: Random Crops/Scales
Thisisnecessarybecausegreenstartswithrandomvaluesanditmayproduceverybiggradients
that may destroy your previous layers
Practical advice
There are a few additional things to keep in mind when performing Transfer Learning:
Constraints from pretrained models Note that if you wish to use a pretrained network,
you may be slightly constrained in terms of the architecture you can use for your new dataset.
For example, you cant arbitrarily take out Conv layers from the pretrained network. However,
some changes are straight-forward: Due to parameter sharing, you can easily run a pretrained
network on images of different spatial size. This is clearly evident in the case of Conv/Pool
layers because their forward function is independent of the input volume spatial size (as long
as the strides fit). In case of FC layers, this still holds true because FC layers can be converted
to a Convolutional Layer: For example, in an AlexNet, the final pooling volume before the first
FC layer is of size [6x6x512]. Therefore, the FC layer looking at this volume is equivalent to
having a Convolutional Layer that has receptive field size 6x6, and is applied with padding of
0.
Learning rates ItscommontouseasmallerlearningrateforConvNetweightsthatarebeing
fine-tuned, in comparison to the (randomly-initialized) weights for the new linear classifier that
computes the class scores of your new dataset. This is because we expect that the ConvNet
weightsarerelativelygood,sowedontwishtodistortthemtooquicklyandtoomuch(especially
while the new Linear Classifier above them is being trained from random initialization).

Part II
LEARNING
15

Chapter 3
Neural Network
Imagine a linear classification which computes scores for different visual categories given the
image using the formula s = Wx, where W is a matrix and x was an input column vector
containing all pixel data of the image. In the case of CIFAR-10, x is a 3072×1 column vector,
and W is a 10×3072 matrix, so that the output scores is a vector of 10 class scores.
An example neural network would instead compute s = W max(0,W x). Here, W could be,
2 1 1
for example, a 100×3072 matrix transforming the image into a 100-dimensional intermediate
vector. The function max(0,) is a non-linearity that is applied elementwise. There are several
choices we could make for the non-linearity (which we will see later), but this one is a common
choice and simply thresholds all activations that are below zero to zero. These are the so called
activation functions. Finally, the matrix W would then be of size 10×100, so that we again
2
get 10 numbers out that we interpret as the class scores. Notice that the non-linearity is critical
computationally - if we left it out, the two matrices could be collapsed to a single matrix,
and therefore the predicted class scores would again be a linear function of the input. The non-
linearityiswherewegetthewiggle. TheparametersW ,W arelearnedwithstochasticgradient
2 1
descent, and their gradients are derived with chain rule (and computed with backpropagation).
Athree-layerneuralnetworkcouldanalogouslylooklikes = W max(0,W max(0,W x)),where
3 2 1
all of W ,W ,W are parameters to be learned. The sizes of the intermediate hidden vectors
3 2 1
are hyperparameters of the network and well see how we can set them later. Lets now look into
how we can interpret these computations from the neuron/network perspective.
An example code for forward-propagating a single neuron might look as follows:
classNeuron(object):
#...
defforward(inputs):
”””assumeinputsandweightsare1−Dnumpyarraysandbiasisanumber”””
cell_body_sum=np.sum(inputs∗self.weights)+self.bias
firing_rate=1.0/(1.0+math.exp(−cell_body_sum))#sigmoidactivationfunction
returnfiring_rate
17

Figure 3.1: Cell diagram
Inotherwords,eachneuronperformsadotproductwiththeinputanditsweights,addsthebias
andappliesthenon-linearity(oractivationfunction), inthiscasethesigmoidσ(x) = 1/(1+ex).
We will go into more details about different activation functions at the chapter Activation
Function.
Single neuron as a linear classifier
The mathematical form of the model Neurons forward computation might look familiar to you.
As with linear classifiers, a neuron has the capacity to “like (activation near one) or “dislike
(activation near zero) certain linear regions of its input space. Hence, with an appropriate loss
function on the neurons output, we can turn a single neuron into a linear classifier:
(cid:80)
BinarySoftmaxclassifier Forexample,wecaninterpretσ( w x +b)tobetheprobability
i i i
ofoneoftheclassesP(y = 1x ;w). TheprobabilityoftheotherclasswouldbeP(y = 0x ;w) =
i i i i
1P(y = 1x ;w), since they must sum to one. With this interpretation, we can formulate the
i i
cross-entropy loss as we have seen in the Linear Classification section, and optimizing it would
leadtoabinarySoftmaxclassifier(alsoknownaslogisticregression). Sincethesigmoidfunction
is restricted to be between 0-1, the predictions of this classifier are based on whether the output
of the neuron is greater than 0.5.
Binary SVM classifier Alternatively,wecouldattachamax-marginhingelosstotheoutput
of the neuron and train it to become a binary Support Vector Machine.
Regularization interpretation The regularization loss in both SVM/Softmax cases could
in this biological view be interpreted as gradual forgetting, since it would have the effect of
driving all synaptic weights w towards zero after every parameter update.
Layer-wise organization
Neural Networks as neurons in graphs. Neural Networks are modeled as collections of neurons
thatareconnectedinanacyclicgraph. Inotherwords, theoutputsofsomeneuronscanbecome

inputs to other neurons. Cycles are not allowed since that would imply an infinite loop in the
forwardpassofanetwork. Insteadofanamorphousblobsofconnectedneurons,NeuralNetwork
modelsareoftenorganizedintodistinctlayersofneurons. Forregularneuralnetworks, themost
common layer type is the fully-connected layer in which neurons between two adjacent layers
are fully pairwise connected, but neurons within a single layer share no connections.
Figure 3.2: Layer-wiseorganization. A2-layerNeuralNetwork(onehiddenlayerof4neurons
(or units) and one output layer with 2 neurons), and three inputs
Example feed-forward computation
#forward−passofa3−layerneuralnetwork:
f=lambdax:1.0/(1.0+np.exp(−x))#activationfunction(usesigmoid)
x=np.random.randn(3,1)#randominputvectorofthreenumbers(3x1)
h1=f(np.dot(W1,x)+b1)#calculatefirsthiddenlayeractivations(4x1)
h2=f(np.dot(W2,h1)+b2)#calculatesecondhiddenlayeractivations(4x1)
out=np.dot(W3,h2)+b3#outputneuron(1x1)
Setting number of layers and their sizes
How do we decide on what architecture to use when faced with a practical problem? Should we
use no hidden layers? One hidden layer? Two hidden layers? How large should each layer be?
First, note that as we increase the size and number of layers in a Neural Network, the capacity
of the network increases. That is, the space of representable functions grows since the neurons
can collaborate to express many different functions. For example, suppose we had a binary
classification problem in two dimensions. We could train three separate neural networks, each
with one hidden layer of some size and obtain different classifiers (Fig. 1.3).
In the diagram above, we can see that Neural Networks with more neurons can express more
complicated functions. However, this is both a blessing (since we can learn to classify more
complicated data) and a curse (since it is easier to overfit the training data). Overfitting
occurs when a model with high capacity fits the noise in the data instead of the (assumed)
underlying relationship. For example, the model with 20 hidden neurons fits all the training
data but at the cost of segmenting the space into many disjoint red and green decision regions.
The model with 3 hidden neurons only has the representational power to classify the data in
broadstrokes. Itmodelsthedataastwoblobsandinterpretsthefewredpointsinsidethegreen

Figure 3.3: Larger Neural Networks can represent more complicated functions. You can play
with these examples in this ConvNetsJS demo.
cluster as outliers (noise). In practice, this could lead to better generalization on the test
set. To reiterate, the regularization strength is the preferred way to control the overfitting of
a neural network. We can look at the results achieved by three different settings (Fig. 1.4).
Figure 3.4: The effects of regularization strength: Each neural network above has 20 hidden
neurons,butchangingtheregularizationstrengthmakesitsfinaldecisionregionssmootherwith
a higher regularization. You can play with these examples in this ConvNetsJS demo.

Chapter 4
Parameters Initialization
4.1 Weights
We normally want the weights to be close to zero because it is reasonable to think that half of
the wights will be positive and half of them will be negative.
Warning: Its not necessarily the case that smaller numbers will work strictly better. For exam-
ple, a Neural Network layer that has very small weights will during backpropagation compute
very small gradients on its data (since this gradient is proportional to the value of the weights).
This could greatly diminish the gradient signal flowing backward through a network, and could
become a concern for deep networks. It would bring all the activations towards 0.
If the weight are initialized with a to high value the activations will explode and saturate to 1.
W=0
There is no balance break. If every neuron in the network computes the same output, then they
will also all compute the same greadients during backpropagation and undergo the exact same
parameter updates. In other words, there is no source of asymmetry between neurons if thir
weights are initialized to be the same.
Small random numbers
Every neurons weight vector is initialized as a random vector sampled from a multi-dimensional
gaussian, so the neurons point in random direction in the input space. It is also possible to
use small numbers drawn from a uniform distribution, but this seems to have relatively little
impact on the final performance in practice.
21

One of the problems of this method is to decide how small should the gradients be. Example
assuiming tanh:
• W = 0.01 * np.random.randn(D,H) : might be too small, all activations become zero,
therefore, no gradient accumulation.
• W = 1* np.random.randn(D,H) : might be too large, almost all neurons completely sat-
urated, thus gradients will be zero.
Another problem is that the distribution of the outputs from a randomly initialized neuron has
a variance that grows with the number of inputs.
Xavier initialization
eq: w = np.random.randn(n) / sqrt(n)
eq for ReLU: w = np.random.randn(n) / sqrt(2n)
It is possible to solve the distribution problem of the above method by normalizing the variance
of each neurons output to 1 by scaling its weight vector by the square root of its fan-in (i.e. its
number of inputs). This ensures that all neurons in the network initially have approximately
the same output distribution and empirically improves the rate of convergence.
Mathematical reasoning
Consider the inner product s =
(cid:80)nw
x between the weights and input , which gives the raw
i i i
activation of a neuron before the non-linearity. We can examine the variance of s:
n
(cid:88)
Var(s) = Var( w x )
i i
i
n
(cid:88)
= Var(w x )
i i
i
n
(cid:88) (4.1)
= [E(w )]2Var(x )+E[(x )]2Var(w )+Var(x )Var(w )
i i i i i i
i
n
(cid:88)
= Var(x )Var(w )
i i
i
= (nVar(w))Var(x)
where in the first 2 steps we have used properties of variance. In third step we assumed zero
mean inputs and weights, so E[x ] = E[w ] = 0. Note that this is not generally the case: For
i i
example ReLU units will have a positive mean. In the last step we assumed that all x ,w are
i i

identically distributed. From this derivation we can see that if we want s to have the same
variance as all of its inputs xx, then during initialization we should make sure that the variance
of every weight w is 1/n. And since Var(aX) = a2Var(X) for a random variable X and a scalar
(cid:112)
a, this implies that we should draw from unit Gaussian and then scale it by a = 1/n, to make
its variance 1/n. This gives the initialization w = np.random.randn(n) / sqrt(n).
A similar analysis is carried out for ReLUs, reaching the conclusion that the variance of neurons
in the network should be . This gives the initialization w = np.random.randn(n) / sqrt(2n),
and is the current recommendation for use in practice in the specific case of neural networks
with ReLU neurons.
Sparse Initialization
Another way to address the uncalibrated variances problem is to set all weight matrices to
zero, but to break symmetry every neuron is randomly connected (with weights sampled from
a small gaussian as above) to a fixed number of neurons below it. A typical number of neurons
to connect to may be as small as 10.
4.2 Biases
It is possible and common to initialize the biases to be zero, since the asymmetry breaking is
provided by the small random numbers in the weights. For ReLU non-linearities, some people
like to use small constant value such as 0.01 for all biases because this ensures that all ReLU
units fire in the beginning and therefore obtain and propagate some gradient. However, it is
not clear if this provides a consistent improvement (in fact some results seem to indicate that
this performs worse) and it is more common to simply use 0 bias initialization.
Summary
ThecurrentrecommendationistouseReLUunitsandusetheXavierinitializationw = np.random.randn(n)
* sqrt(2.0/n) and all biases equal to 0 or 0.01. Also batch normalization helps having less
headaches with weight initialization.

Chapter 5
Activation Function
Activation functions are needed in order to increase the complexity of the NN, without them
it would just be a linear sandwich of linear functions (multiplying linear functions = linear
function)
5.1 Sigmoid
Figure 5.1: Sigmoid
σ(x) = 1
1+e−x
• Saturated neurons ”kill” the gradient
• No zero-centered output
• exp() is computationaly expensive
5.2 Tanh
tanh(x) = 2 −1
e−2x+1
• Zero centered output
25

Figure 5.2: Tanh
• Saturated neurons ”kill” the gradient
5.3 ReLU
Figure 5.3: ReLU
f(x) = max(0,x) If a neuron has x < 0 the ReLU kills it in backprop. The gradient will be
0 so that neuron will not backprop downwards and its weights will not be updated. Its like a
boolean gate. The gradient in the case of x = 0 is undefined (unlike case).
• Does not saturate
• Computationally efficient
• Converges mch faster than sigmoid/tanh in practive ( 6x)
• Not zero centred output
• If your unlucky a neuron may be never active because the initialization has put it outside
the manifold.
• When the learning rate is high is easy to kill a lot of neurons. Imagine the activation
function as a threshold which is moving while training. If the learning rate is to high it
may move out of the data manifold. In that case the neuron dies and will never be able
to recover because will never update again.
Itisagoodpracticetoinitializethemwithaslightlypositiveinitialbiastoavoid”deadneurons”

5.4 Leaky ReLU
Figure 5.4: Leaky ReLU
(cid:40)
αx if(x ≤ 0)
f(x) = max(αx,x) = where α is a very small number 0.01 which can be a
x if(x > 0)
hyperparameter or learned through .
• Does not saturate
• Computationally efficient
• Converges much faster than sigmoid/tanh in practice ( 6x)
• Does not die
• Not zero centred output
• Consistency of the benefits across tasks not clear
5.5 ELU - Exponential Linear Units
Figure 5.5: ELU
(cid:40)
α(ex−1) if(x ≤ 0)
f(x) =
x if(x > 0)
• All benefits of ReLu
• Does not die
• Closer to zero mean outputs

• exp() is computationally expensive
• There is controversy if it actually trains better with this than with ReLU
5.6 Maxout
Figure 5.6: Maxout
f(x) = max(wTx+b ,wTx+b )
1 1 2 2
• Generalized ReLU and Leaky ReLU
• Does not saturate
• Does not die
• Linear Regime
• Doubles the number of parameters/neuros
Conclusion
• Use ReLU but be careful with your learning rates. So for example a 3-layer neural
network will look like this:
• Try out Leaky ReLU/Maxout/ELU
• Try out tanh but don’t expect much
• Don’t use sigmoid

Chapter 6
Loss function
We have discussed the regularization loss part of the objective, which can be seen as penalizing
some measure of complexity of the model. The second part of an objective is the data loss,
which in a supervised learning problem measures the compatibility between a prediction (e.g.
the class scores in classification) and the ground truth label. The data loss takes the form of an
average over the data losses for every individual example. That is, L = 1 (cid:80) L where N is the
N i i
number of training data. Lets abbreviate f = f(x ;W) to be the activations of the output layer
i
in a Neural Network. There are several types of problems you might want to solve in practice:
Classification
Classification is the case that we have so far discussed at length. Here, we assume a dataset of
examples and a single correct label (out of a fixed set) for each example. One of two most com-
monly seen cost functions in this setting are the SVM (e.g. the Weston Watkins formulation):
(cid:88)
L = max(0,f −f +1) (6.1)
i j yi
j(cid:54)=yi
As we briefly alluded to, some people report better performance with the squared hinge loss
(i.e. instead using max(0,f −f +1)2). The second common choice is the Softmax classifier
j yi
that uses the cross-entropy loss:
(cid:32) (cid:33)
efyi
L = −log (6.2)
i (cid:80) efj
j
In some rough sense, the cross-entropy is measuring how inefficient our predictions are for
describing the truth.
29

Noise-contrastive estimation isasamplinglosstypicallyusedtotrainclassifierswithalargeout-
put vocabulary. Calculating the softmax over a large number of possible classes is prohibitively
expensive. Using NCE, we can reduce the problem to binary classification problem by train-
ing the classifier to discriminate between samples from the real distribution and an artificially
generated noise distribution.
Problem
Large number of classes. When the set of labels is very large (e.g. words in English dictionary,
or ImageNet which contains 22,000 categories), it may be helpful to use Hierarchical Softmax.
The hierarchical softmax decomposes labels into a tree. Each label is then represented as a
path along the tree, and a Softmax classifier is trained at every node of the tree to disambiguate
between the left and right branch. The structure of the tree strongly impacts the performance
and is generally problem-dependent.
Attribute Classification
Bothlossesaboveassumethatthereisasinglecorrectanswery . Butwhatify isabinaryvector
i i
where every example may or may not have a certain attribute, and where the attributes are not
exclusive? For example, images on Instagram can be thought of as labeled with a certain subset
of hashtags from a large set of all hashtags, and an image may contain multiple. A sensible
approach in this case is to build a binary classifier for every single attribute independently. For
example, a binary classifier for each category independently would take the form:
(cid:88)
L = max(0,1−y f ) (6.3)
i ij j
j
where the sum is over all categories j, and y is either +1 or -1 depending on whether the i-th
ij
exampleislabeledwiththej-thattribute, andthescorevectorf willbepositivewhentheclass
j
is predicted to be present and negative otherwise. Notice that loss is accumulated if a positive
example has score less than +1, or when a negative example has score greater than -1.
An alternative to this loss would be to train a logistic regression classifier for every attribute
independently. A binary logistic regression classifier has only two classes (0,1), and calculates
the probability of class 1 as:
1
P(y = 1 | x;w,b) = = σ(wTx+b) (6.4)
1+e−(wTx+b)
Since the probabilities of class 1 and 0 sum to one, the probability for class 0 is P(y = 0 |
x;w,b) = 1−P(y = 1 | x;w,b). Hence, an example is classified as a positive example (y = 1) if

σ(wTx+b) > 0.5, or equivalently if the score wTx+b > 0. The loss function then maximizes
the log likelihood of this probability. You can convince yourself that this simplifies to:
(cid:88)
L = y log(σ(f ))+(1−y )log(1−σ(f )) (6.5)
i ij j ij j
j
where the labels y are assumed to be either 1 (positive) or 0 (negative), and σ(·) is the sigmoid
ij
function. The expression above can look scary but the gradient on f is in fact extremely simple
andintuitive: ∂L /∂f = y −σ(f )(asyoucandoublecheckyourselfbytakingthederivatives).
i j ij j
Regression
Regression is the task of predicting real-valued quantities, such as the price of houses or the
length of something in an image. For this task, it is common to compute the loss between the
predicted quantity and the true answer and then measure the L2 squared norm, or L1 norm of
the difference. The L2 norm squared would compute the loss for a single example of the form:
L = (cid:107)f −y (cid:107)2 (6.6)
i i 2
The reason the L2 norm is squared in the objective is that the gradient becomes much simpler,
withoutchangingtheoptimalparameterssincesquaringisamonotonicoperation. TheL1norm
would be formulated by summing the absolute value along each dimension:
(cid:88)
L = (cid:107)f −y (cid:107) = | f −(y ) | (6.7)
i i 1 j i j
j
(cid:80)
where the sum is a sum over all dimensions of the desired prediction, if there is more than
j
one quantity being predicted. Looking at only the j-th dimension of the i-th example and
denoting the difference between the true and the predicted value by δ , the gradient for this
ij
dimension (i.e. ∂L /∂f is easily derived to be either δ with the L2 norm, or sign(δ ). That
i j ij ij
is, the gradient on the score will either be directly proportional to the difference in the error, or
it will be fixed and only inherit the sign of the difference.
Outliers L2 norm is not that good dealing with outliers in the training samples. You may
consider L1 or variations of L2.
Word of caution It is important to note that the L2 loss is much harder to optimize than a
morestablelosssuchasSoftmax. Intuitively,itrequiresaveryfragileandspecificpropertyfrom
the network to output exactly one correct value for each input (and its augmentations). Notice

that this is not the case with Softmax, where the precise value of each score is less important:
It only matters that their magnitudes are appropriate. Additionally, the L2 loss is less robust
because outliers can introduce huge gradients. When faced with a regression problem, first
consider if it is absolutely inadequate to quantize the output into bins. For example, if you are
predicting star rating for a product, it might work much better to use 5 independent classifiers
for ratings of 1-5 stars instead of a regression loss. Classification has the additional benefit
that it can give you a distribution over the regression outputs, not just a single output with
no indication of its confidence. If youre certain that classification is not appropriate, use the
L2 but be careful: For example, the L2 is more fragile and applying dropout in the network
(especially in the layer right before the L2 loss) is not a great idea.
When faced with a regression task, first consider if it is absolutely necessary. Instead, have
a strong preference to discretizing your outputs to bins and perform classification over them
whenever possible.
Structured prediction
The structured loss refers to a case where the labels can be arbitrary structures such as graphs,
trees, or other complex objects. Usually it is also assumed that the space of structures is very
large and not easily enumerable. The basic idea behind the structured SVM loss is to demand
a margin between the correct structure yi and the highest-scoring incorrect structure. It is not
common to solve this problem as a simple unconstrained optimization problem with gradient
descent. Instead, special solvers are usually devised so that the specific simplifying assumptions
of the structure space can be taken advantage of. We mention the problem briefly but consider
the specifics to be outside of the scope of the class.

Chapter 7
Backpropagation
Introduction
Motivation In this section we will develop expertise with an intuitive understanding of back-
propagation, which is a way of computing gradients of expressions through recursive application
of chain rule. Understanding of this process and its subtleties is critical for you to understand,
and effectively develop, design and debug Neural Networks.
Problemstatement Thecoreproblemstudiedinthissectionisasfollows: Wearegivensome
function f(x) where x is a vector of inputs and we are interested in computing the gradient of
f at x (i.e. ∇f(x) ).
Motivation Recall that the primary reason we are interested in this problem is that in the
specific case of Neural Networks, f will correspond to the loss function ( L ) and the inputs x
will consist of the training data and the neural network weights. For example, the loss could
be the SVM loss function and the inputs are both the training data (x ,y ),i = 1...N and the
i i
weights and biases W,b. Note that (as is usually the case in Machine Learning) we think of the
training data as given and fixed, and of the weights as variables we have control over. Hence,
even though we can easily use backpropagation to compute the gradient on the input examples
x , in practice we usually only compute the gradient for the parameters (e.g. W,b) so that we
i
can use it to perform a parameter update. However, as we will see later in the class the gradient
on xixi can still be useful sometimes, for example for purposes of visualization and interpreting
what the Neural Network might be doing.
If you are coming to this class and youre comfortable with deriving gradients with chain rule,
we would still like to encourage you to at least skim this section, since it presents a rarely
developed view of backpropagation as backward flow in real-valued circuits and any insights
youll gain may help you throughout the class.
33

Simple expressions and interpretation of the gradient
Lets start simple so that we can develop the notation and conventions for more complex expres-
sions. Consider a simple multiplication function of two numbers f(x,y) = xy. It is a matter of
simple calculus to derive the partial derivative for either input:
∂f ∂f
f(x,y) = xy → = y = x (7.1)
∂x ∂y
Interpretation Keep in mind what the derivatives tell you: They indicate the rate of change
of a function with respect to that variable surrounding an infinitesimally small region near a
particular point:
df(x) f(x+h)−f(x)
= lim (7.2)
dx h →0 h
A technical note is that the division sign on the left-hand sign is, unlike the division sign on the
right-hand sign, not a division. Instead, this notation indicates that the operator d is being
dx
applied to the function f, and returns a different function (the derivative). A nice way to think
abouttheexpressionaboveisthatwhenhhisverysmall,thenthefunctioniswell-approximated
by a straight line, and the derivative is its slope. In other words, the derivative on each variable
tells you the sensitivity of the whole expression on its value. For example, if x = 4,y = 3 then
f(x,y) = 12 and the derivative on x ∂f = −3. This tells us that if we were to increase the
∂x
value of this variable by a tiny amount, the effect on the whole expression would be to decrease
it (due to the negative sign), and by three times that amount. This can be seen by rearranging
the above equation ( f(x+h) = f(x)+h df(x) ). Analogously, since ∂f = 4, we expect that
dx ∂y
increasing the value of y by some very small amount h would also increase the output of the
function (due to the positive sign), and by 4h.
The derivative on each variable tells you the sensitivity of the whole expression on its value.
As mentioned, the gradient ∇f is the vector of partial derivatives, so we have that ∇f =
[∂f, ∂f] = [y,x]. Even though the gradient is technically a vector, we will often use terms such
∂x ∂y
as “the gradient on x instead of the technically correct phrase “the partial derivative on x for
simplicity.
We can also derive the derivatives for the addition operation:
∂f ∂f
f(x,y) = x+y → = 1 = 1 (7.3)
∂x ∂y
that is, the derivative on both x,y is one regardless of what the values of x,y are. This makes
sense, since increasing either x,y would increase the output of f, and the rate of that increase
would be independent of what the actual values of x,y are (unlike the case of multiplication
above). The last function well use quite a bit in the class is the max operation:

∂f ∂f
f(x,y) = max(x,y) → = (x >= y) = (y >= x) (7.4)
∂x ∂y
Thatis, the(sub)gradientis1ontheinputthatwaslargerand0ontheotherinput. Intuitively,
if the inputs are x = 4,y = 2, then the max is 4, and the function is not sensitive to the setting
of y. That is, if we were to increase it by a tiny amount h, the function would keep outputting
4, and therefore the gradient is zero: there is no effect. Of course, if we were to change y by
a large amount (e.g. larger than 2), then the value of f would change, but the derivatives tell
us nothing about the effect of such large changes on the inputs of a function; They are only
informative for tiny, infinitesimally small changes on the inputs, as indicated by the lim in
h→0
its definition.
Compound expressions with chain rule
Lets now start to consider more complicated expressions that involve multiple composed func-
tions,suchasf(x,y,z) = (x+y)z. Thisexpressionisstillsimpleenoughtodifferentiatedirectly,
but well take a particular approach to it that will be helpful with understanding the intuition
behind backpropagation. In particular, note that this expression can be broken down into two
expressions: q = x+y and f = qz. Moreover, we know how to compute the derivatives of both
expressions separately, as seen in the previous section. f is just multiplication of q and z, so
∂f = z, ∂f = q andq isadditionofxandy so ∂q = 1, ∂q = 1. However, wedontnecessarilycare
∂q ∂z ∂x ∂y
about the gradient on the intermediate value q - the value of ∂f is not useful. Instead, we are
∂q
ultimately interested in the gradient of f with respect to its inputs x,y,z. The chain rule tells
us that the correct way to “chain these gradient expressions together is through multiplication.
For example, ∂f = ∂f ∂q. In practice this is simply a multiplication of the two numbers that
∂x ∂q ∂x
hold the two gradients. Lets see this with an example:
#setsomeinputs
x=−2;y=5;z=−4
#performtheforwardpass
q=x+y#qbecomes3
f=q∗z#fbecomes−12
#performthebackwardpass(backpropagation)inreverseorder:
#firstbackpropthroughf=q∗z
dfdz=q#df/dz=q,sogradientonzbecomes3
dfdq=z#df/dq=z,sogradientonqbecomes−4
#nowbackpropthroughq=x+y
dfdx=1.0∗dfdq#dq/dx=1.Andthemultiplicationhereisthechainrule!
dfdy=1.0∗dfdq#dq/dy=1
At the end we are left with the gradient in the variables [dfdx,dfdy,dfdz], which tell us the
sensitivity of the variables x,y,z on f. This is the simplest example of backpropagation. Going

forward, we will want to use a more concise notation so that we dont have to keep writing the
df part. That is, for example instead of dfdq we would simply write dq, and always assume
that the gradient is with respect to the final output.
Figure 7.1: Neuron backprop
This computation can also be nicely visualized with a circuit diagram in figure 1.2. The real-
valued ”circuit” on left shows the visual representation of the computation. The forward pass
computes values from inputs to output (shown in green). The backward pass then performs
backpropagation which starts at the end and recursively applies the chain rule to compute the
gradients (shown in red) all the way to the inputs of the circuit. The gradients can be thought
of as flowing backwards through the circuit.
Figure 7.2: Neuron backprop diagram
Intuitive understanding of backpropagation
Notice that backpropagation is a beautifully local process. Every gate in a circuit diagram
gets some inputs and can right away compute two things: 1. its output value and 2. the
local gradient of its inputs with respect to its output value. Notice that the gates can do this
completely independently without being aware of any of the details of the full circuit that they
are embedded in. However, once the forward pass is over, during backpropagation the gate will
eventually learn about the gradient of its output value on the final output of the entire circuit.
Chain rule says that the gate should take that gradient and multiply it into every gradient it
normally computes for all of its inputs.

This extra multiplication (for each input) due to the chain rule can turn a single and relatively
useless gate into a cog in a complex circuit such as an entire neural network.
Letsgetanintuitionforhowthisworksbyreferringagaintotheexample. Theaddgatereceived
inputs [-2, 5] and computed output 3. Since the gate is computing the addition operation, its
local gradient for both of its inputs is +1. The rest of the circuit computed the final value,
which is -12. During the backward pass in which the chain rule is applied recursively backwards
throughthecircuit,theaddgate(whichisaninputtothemultiplygate)learnsthatthegradient
for its output was -4. If we anthropomorphize the circuit as wanting to output a higher value
(which can help with intuition), then we can think of the circuit as wanting the output of the
add gate to be lower (due to negative sign), and with a force of 4. To continue the recurrence
and to chain the gradient, the add gate takes that gradient and multiplies it to all of the local
gradients for its inputs (making the gradient on both x and y 1 * -4 = -4). Notice that this has
the desired effect: If x,y were to decrease (responding to their negative gradient) then the add
gates output would decrease, which in turn makes the multiply gates output increase.
Backpropagation can thus be thought of as gates communicating to each other (through the
gradient signal) whether they want their outputs to increase or decrease (and how strongly), so
as to make the final output value higher.
Modularity: Sigmoid example
The gates we introduced above are relatively arbitrary. Any kind of differentiable function can
act as a gate, and we can group multiple gates into a single gate, or decompose a function into
multiple gates whenever it is convenient. Lets look at another expression that illustrates this
point:
1
f(w,x) = (7.5)
1+e−(w0x0+w1x1+w2)
as we will see later in the class, this expression describes a 2-dimensional neuron (with inputs
x and weights w) that uses the sigmoid activation function. But for now lets think of this
very simply as just a function from inputs w,x to a single number. The function is made up of
multiple gates. In addition to the ones described already above (add, mul, max), there are four
more:
1 df df df df
f(x) = → = −1/x2, f (x) = c+x → = 1, f(x) = ex → = ex, f (x) = ax → = a
c a
x dx dx dx dx
(7.6)
Where the functions f ,f translate the input by a constant of c and scale the input by a
c a
constant of a, respectively. These are technically special cases of addition and multiplication,
butweintroducethemas(new)unarygatesheresincewedoneedthegradientsfortheconstants.
c,a. The full circuit then looks as follows:

Figure 7.3: Example circuit for a 2D neuron with a sigmoid activation function. The inputs
are [x0,x1] and the (learnable) weights of the neuron are [w0,w1,w2]. As we will see later, the
neuron computes a dot product with the input and then its activation is softly squashed by the
sigmoid function to be in range from 0 to 1.
In the example above, we see a long chain of function applications that operates on the result
of the dot product between w,x. The function that these operations implement is called the
sigmoid function σ(x). It turns out that the derivative of the sigmoid function with respect
to its input simplifies if you perform the derivation (after a fun tricky part where we add and
subtract a 1 in the numerator):
1 dσ(x) e−x (cid:18) 1+e−x−1 (cid:19)(cid:18) 1 (cid:19)
σ(x) = → = = = (1−σ(x))σ(x) (7.7)
1+e−x dx (1+e−x)2 1+e−x 1+e−x
As we see, the gradient turns out to simplify and becomes surprisingly simple. For example,
the sigmoid expression receives the input 1.0 and computes the output 0.73 during the forward
pass. The derivation above shows that the local gradient would simply be (1 - 0.73) * 0.73 =
0.2, as the circuit computed before (see the image above), except this way it would be done
with a single, simple and efficient expression (and with less numerical issues). Therefore, in any
real practical application it would be very useful to group these operations into a single gate.
Lets see the backprop for this neuron in code:
w=[2,−3,−3]#assumesomerandomweightsanddata
x=[−1,−2]
#forwardpass
dot=w[0]∗x[0]+w[1]∗x[1]+w[2]
f=1.0/(1+math.exp(−dot))#sigmoidfunction
#backwardpassthroughtheneuron(backpropagation)
ddot=(1−f)∗f#gradientondotvariable,usingthesigmoidgradientderivation
dx=[w[0]∗ddot,w[1]∗ddot]#backpropintox
dw=[x[0]∗ddot,x[1]∗ddot,1.0∗ddot]#backpropintow
#we'redone!wehavethegradientsontheinputstothecircuit

Implementation protip staged backpropagation. As shown in the code above, in practice
it is always helpful to break down the forward pass into stages that are easily backpropped
through. For example here we created an intermediate variable dot which holds the output
of the dot product between w and x. During backward pass we then successively compute (in
reverse order) the corresponding variables (e.g. ddot, and ultimately dw, dx) that hold the
gradients of those variables.
The point of this section is that the details of how the backpropagation is performed, and which
parts of the forward function we think of as gates, is a matter of convenience. It helps to be
aware of which parts of the expression have easy local gradients, so that they can be chained
together with the least amount of code and effort.
Backprop in practice: Staged computation
Lets see this with another example. Suppose that we have a function of the form:
x+σ(y)
f(x,y) = (7.8)
σ(x)+(x+y)2
To be clear, this function is completely useless and its not clear why you would ever want to
computeitsgradient,exceptforthefactthatitisagoodexampleofbackpropagationinpractice.
It is very important to stress that if you were to launch into performing the differentiation with
respect to either x or y, you would end up with very large and complex expressions. However,
it turns out that doing so is completely unnecessary because we dont need to have an explicit
function written down that evaluates the gradient. We only have to know how to compute it.
Here is how we would structure the forward pass of such expression:
x=3#examplevalues
y=−4
#forwardpass
sigy=1.0/(1+math.exp(−y))#sigmoidinnumerator #(1)
num=x+sigy#numerator #(2)
sigx=1.0/(1+math.exp(−x))#sigmoidindenominator#(3)
xpy=x+y #(4)
xpysqr=xpy∗∗2 #(5)
den=sigx+xpysqr#denominator #(6)
invden=1.0/den #(7)
f=num∗invden#done! #(8)
Phew, by the end of the expression we have computed the forward pass. Notice that we have
structured the code in such way that it contains multiple intermediate variables, each of which
areonlysimpleexpressionsforwhichwealreadyknowthelocalgradients. Therefore,computing
thebackproppassiseasy: Wellgobackwardsandforeveryvariablealongthewayintheforward
pass(sigy, num, sigx, xpy, xpysqr, den, invden)wewillhavethesamevariable, butone

that begins with a d, which will hold the gradient of the output of the circuit with respect to
that variable. Additionally, note that every single piece in our backprop will involve computing
the local gradient of that expression, and chaining it with the gradient on that expression with
a multiplication. For each row, we also highlight which part of the forward pass it refers to:
#backpropf=num∗invden
dnum=invden#gradientonnumerator #(8)
dinvden=num #(8)
#backpropinvden=1.0/den
dden=(−1.0/(den∗∗2))∗dinvden #(7)
#backpropden=sigx+xpysqr
dsigx=(1)∗dden #(6)
dxpysqr=(1)∗dden #(6)
#backpropxpysqr=xpy∗∗2
dxpy=(2∗xpy)∗dxpysqr #(5)
#backpropxpy=x+y
dx=(1)∗dxpy #(4)
dy=(1)∗dxpy #(4)
#backpropsigx=1.0/(1+math.exp(−x))
dx+=((1−sigx)∗sigx)∗dsigx#Notice+=!!Seenotesbelow #(3)
#backpropnum=x+sigy
dx+=(1)∗dnum #(2)
dsigy=(1)∗dnum #(2)
#backpropsigy=1.0/(1+math.exp(−y))
dy+=((1−sigy)∗sigy)∗dsigy #(1)
#done!phew
Notice a few things:
Cache forward pass variables To compute the backward pass it is very helpful to have
some of the variables that were used in the forward pass. In practice you want to structure your
code so that you cache these variables, and so that they are available during backpropagation.
If this is too difficult, it is possible (but wasteful) to recompute them.
Gradientsaddupatforks Theforwardexpressioninvolvesthevariablesx,ymultipletimes,
sowhenweperformbackpropagationwemustbecarefultouse+=insteadof =toaccumulatethe
gradient on these variables (otherwise we would overwrite it). This follows the multivariable
chain rule in Calculus, which states that if a variable branches out to different parts of the
circuit, then the gradients that flow back to it will add.
Patterns in backward flow
It is interesting to note that in many cases the backward-flowing gradient can be interpreted
on an intuitive level. For example, the three most commonly used gates in neural networks

(add,mul,max), all have very simple interpretations in terms of how they act during backprop-
agation. Consider this example circuit:
Figure 7.4: An example circuit demonstrating the intuition behind the operations that back-
propagationperformsduringthebackwardpassinordertocomputethegradientsontheinputs.
Sumoperationdistributesgradientsequallytoallitsinputs. Maxoperationroutesthegradient
to the higher input. Multiply gate takes the input activations, swaps them and multiplies by
its gradient.
Looking at the diagram above as an example, we can see that:
add gate The add gate always takes the gradient on its output and distributes it equally to
all of its inputs, regardless of what their values were during the forward pass. This follows from
the fact that the local gradient for the add operation is simply +1.0, so the gradients on all
inputs will exactly equal the gradients on the output because it will be multiplied by x1.0 (and
remain unchanged). In the example circuit above, note that the + gate routed the gradient of
2.00 to both of its inputs, equally and unchanged.
max gate The max gate routes the gradient. Unlike the add gate which distributed the
gradient unchanged to all its inputs, the max gate distributes the gradient (unchanged) to
exactly one of its inputs (the input that had the highest value during the forward pass). This
is because the local gradient for a max gate is 1.0 for the highest value, and 0.0 for all other
values. In the example circuit above, the max operation routed the gradient of 2.00 to the z
variable, which had a higher value than w, and the gradient on w remains zero.
multiply gate The multiply gate is a little less easy to interpret. Its local gradients are the
input values (except switched), and this is multiplied by the gradient on its output during the
chain rule. In the example above, the gradient on x is -8.00, which is -4.00 x 2.00.
Unintuitive effects and their consequences. Notice that if one of the inputs to the multiply
gate is very small and the other is very big, then the multiply gate will do something slightly
unintuitive: it will assign a relatively huge gradient to the small input and a tiny gradient to the
largeinput. NotethatinlinearclassifierswheretheweightsaredotproductedwTx (multiplied)
i
with the inputs, this implies that the scale of the data has an effect on the magnitude of the
gradient for the weights. For example, if you multiplied all input data examples x by 1000
i

during preprocessing, then the gradient on the weights will be 1000 times larger, and youd have
to lower the learning rate by that factor to compensate. This is why preprocessing matters a
lot, sometimes in subtle ways! And having intuitive understanding for how the gradients flow
can help you debug some of these cases.
Gradients for vectorized operations
The above sections were concerned with single variables, but all concepts extend in a straight-
forward manner to matrix and vector operations. However, one must pay closer attention to
dimensions and transpose operations.
Matrix-Matrix multiply gradient Possibly the most tricky operation is the matrix-matrix
multiplication (which generalizes all matrix-vector and vector-vector) multiply operations:
#forwardpass
W=np.random.randn(5,10)
X=np.random.randn(10,3)
D=W.dot(X)
#nowsupposewehadthegradientonDfromaboveinthecircuit
dD=np.random.randn(∗D.shape)#sameshapeasD
dW=dD.dot(X.T)#.Tgivesthetransposeofthematrix
dX=W.T.dot(dD)
Tip: use dimension analysis! Note that you do not need to remember the expressions for dW
and dX because they are easy to re-derive based on dimensions. For instance, we know that the
gradient on the weights dW must be of the same size as W after it is computed, and that it must
depend on matrix multiplication of X and dD (as is the case when both X,W are single numbers
and not matrices). There is always exactly one way of achieving this so that the dimensions
work out. For example, X is of size [10 x 3] and dD of size [5 x 3], so if we want dW and W has
shape [5 x 10], then the only way of achieving this is with dD.dot(X.T), as shown above.
Work with small, explicit examples . Some people may find it difficult at first to derive
thegradientupdatesforsomevectorizedexpressions. Ourrecommendationistoexplicitlywrite
out a minimal vectorized example, derive the gradient on paper and then generalize the pattern
to its efficient, vectorized form.
Erik Learned-Miller has also written up a longer related document on taking matrix/vector
derivatives which you might find helpful. Find it here.

Summary
• We developed intuition for what the gradients mean, how they flow backwards in the
circuit, and how they communicate which part of the circuit should increase or decrease
and with what force to make the final output higher.
• Wediscussedtheimportanceofstagedcomputationforpracticalimplementationsofback-
propagation. You always want to break up your function into modules for which you can
easily derive local gradients, and then chain them with chain rule. Crucially, you almost
never want to write out these expressions on paper and differentiate them symbolically
in full, because you never need an explicit mathematical equation for the gradient of the
input variables. Hence, decompose your expressions into stages such that you can dif-
ferentiate every stage independently (the stages will be matrix vector multiplies, or max
operations, or sum operations, etc.) and then backprop through the variables one step at
a time.
In the next section we will start to define Neural Networks, and backpropagation will allow us
to efficiently compute the gradients on the connections of the neural network, with respect to a
loss function. In other words, were now ready to train Neural Nets, and the most conceptually
difficult part of this class is behind us! ConvNets will then be a small step away.

Chapter 8
Parameters Update
IMPORTANT NOTATION!!: Through all this chapter I am saying parameters = weights, but
remember that there are other ones like the bias.
First Order Optimization Methods
The pseudo-code for updating the parameters:
whileTrue:
data_batch=dataset.sample_data_batch()
loss=network.forward(data_batch)
dw=network.backward()
w+=−learning_rate∗dw
This update (w+=-lr*dw) is an stochastic gradient descent. Let’s see better ways of updating
the parameters. The plot below shows different update strategies to optimize the loss function.
In DNN, as you scale your model, local minima become less and less of an issue. The loss
function shape we should have in mind is like a landskape with a lot of local minima but all
with more or less the same loss. As you scale the model the distance between the bigger and
lower local minima scales down (there is no bad local minima in big networks).
Stochastic gradient descent
w = w −α(cid:52)L(w ) (8.1)
t t−1 t−1
where (cid:52)L(w ) is the derivative of the loss function and the learning rate
t−1
Problem: Supose a 2dimensions loss function (NN with 2 layers and 2 weights) which is steep
vertically and shallow horizontally (weight represented in the vertical axis has a higher impact
45

Figure 8.1: SGD example
over the loss function). The horizontal gradient is small because it is a shallow function in
the horizontal direction, and a big gradient in the vertical direction because it is steep in this
direction. Then, the update is way too slow in the horizontal direction, and to fast in the
vertical direction. This causes an ugly jerk shape.
Notice that it is not an option to just decrease the learning rate because then it would take
forever to cross all the shallow surface.
IMPORTANT NOTATION!!: Through all this chapter I am saying parameters = weights, but
remember that there are other ones like the bias.
Momentum update
v = 0
0
v = µv −α(cid:52)L(w ) (8.2)
t t−1 t−1
w = w +v
t t−1 t
where µ ∈ [0,1] and usually takes values around 0.5, 0.9 or 0.99 (sometimes annealed over
time 0.5 -¿ 0.99)
It can be interpreted as a ball rolling across the loss function starting at velocity 0. Notice that
would represent position, velocity, friction (decreasing velocity over time). Now you will speed
up in shallow surfaces directions and in steep directions you will be jiggly but you will have a
force pushing you to the center (like a ball rolling in a convex function).
In the first plot we can see that first it overshoots because of all the accumulated velocity but
it ends converging to the minimum quicker than SVG.
Nesterov Momentum update (or Nesterov accelerated gradient descent)
v = 0
0
v = µv −α(cid:52)L(w +µv ) (8.3)
t t−1 t−1 t−1
w = w +v
t t−1 t
A slightly different version of the momentum update has recently been gaining popularity. It
enjoys stronger theoretical converge guarantees for convex functions and in practice it also
consistenly works slightly better than standard momentum.

The core idea behind Nesterov momentum is that when the current parameter vector is at
some position x (weights), then looking at the momentum update above, we know that the
momentum term alone (i.e. ignoring the second term with the gradient) is about to nudge the
parameter vector by µ∗v. Therefore, if we are about to compute the gradient, we can treat the
future approximate position x+µ∗v as a lookahead - this is a point in the vicinity of where we
are soon going to end up. Hence, it makes sense to compute the gradient at x+µ∗v instead
of at the old/stale position x.
Figure 8.2: Nesterov Momentum update
IMPORTANT NOTATION!!: Through all this chapter I am saying parameters = weights, but
remember that there are other ones like the bias.
AdaGrad
c = c +(cid:52)L(w )2
t t−1 t−1
α(cid:52)L(w ) (8.4)
t−1
w = w − √
t t−1 c +1−7
t
whereisthecacheisagiantvectorofthesamesizeofyourparametervector. Sothiscachekeeps
track of the sum of squares (or also called the uncentered second moment) of your parameters
in each direction (array). So now, with the cache, each dimension of the parameter vector has
a different dynamic learning rate which is dynamically scaled based on what kind of gradients
are you seeing in terms of their scale.
Inthefirstcaseexplainedsteepverticallyandshallowhorizontallylossfunction(2weights). We
have a large gradient vertically which will be added to cache. So in the vertical direction, the
parameterupdatewillbegettingsmallerandsmaller(=smallersteps)becausethedenominator
keeps increasing (= learning rate keeps decreasing). In the horizontal direction the surface is
shallow,sowillbesmallandasaconsequencethelearningratewillnotdecrease. Thehorizontal
direction will have faster progress relative to the vertical direction.
So the cache is acting as an equalizer accounting for the stiffness ( ) of the loss function in
the parameters direction. Keep in mind that this equalizer effect over a specific parameter
(=weight) is independent of the rest of parameters. It is not like a normalization.

Problem: Whentrainingoverlongtimethestepsize(=learningrate)goesto0andthenetwork
stops learning. To solve this, the next method is proposed.
RMSProp
c = γc +(1−γ)(cid:52)L(w )2
t t−1 t−1
α(cid:52)L(w ) (8.5)
t−1
w = w − √
t t−1 c+1−7
The idea is that instead of keeping the sum of squares in every direction of the parameters,
we make the counter leaky by introducing the decay rate . So we maintain the nice effect of
equalizing the directions but it will not converge to 0. The term is there just to prevent the
division by 0.
You can also imagine the decay rate as a sort of a forgetting factor that makes the cache only
a function of the last few gradient but in an exponential weighted sum rate. Also, notice that
we could not do something like having a sliding window just to track the previous n gradients
because it would take too much memory.
Comparing RMSProp vs AdaGrad in DNNs, in practice AdaGrad usually ends up stopping too
early.
IMPORTANT NOTATION!!: Through all this chapter I am saying parameters = weights, but
remember that there are other ones like the bias.
Adam update - USE THIS ONE
µv +(1−µ)(cid:52)L(w )
t−1 t−1
v = c = 0v =
0 0 t 1−µt
γc +(1−γ)(cid:52)L(w )2
c = t−1 t−1 (8.6)
t 1−γt
αv
t
w = w − √
t t−1 c+1−7
Adam update is a combination of adaptive scaling (AdaGrad) and momentum (Momentum up-
date). is the velocity and the cache. Sometimes and are detonated first and second momentum,
respectively. To compensate the fact that the momentums are initialized to zero () and need
some time to ”warm up”, we introduce a bias correction in order to scale up and in the first
iterations so you do not get a very biased estimate of the first and second momentum. bias
correction: 1 , 1 ,
1−µt 1−γt
So in DNNs you are in a stochastic setting, you are sampling from a mini-batch, there is going
to be a lot of randomness in the forward pass. In other words, you are getting a lot of noisy
gradients.

• Momentum contribution: So instead of using every gradient at every single time step we
only use the decaying sum of previous gradients which helps use stabilize your gradient
direction a bit.
• Cache contribution: To make sure that the steps size workout in steep and shallow direc-
tions.
Usually µ = 0.9,γ = 0.995 but if you cross-validate them it can help a bit.
Why using momentum update instead of Nesterov Momentum update? It could be also done
but it does not make such a difference.
IMPORTANT NOTATION!!: Through all this chapter I am saying parameters = weights, but
remember that there are other ones like the bias.
Learning Rate - Decay over time
So which is the best learning rate for training DNNs? None. The best one is to start with high
learning first because it optimizes faster than the ”good learning rate”, in this way you do really
fast progress. But at some point you are going to be too stochastic and you can not converge
to a minimum. So, at this point you must start decreasing the learning rate.
Figure 8.3: Learning rate selection
Anotherwayofseeingitistohaveinmindisthatwithahighlearningrate, thesystemcontains
too much kinetic energy and the parameter vector bounces around chaotically, unable to settle
down into deeper, but narrower parts of the loss function.
Knowing when to decay the learning rate can be tricky: Decay it slowly and youll be wasting
computation bouncing around chaotically with little improvement for a long time. But decay it
too aggressively and the system will cool too quickly, unable to reach the best position it can.
There are three common types of implementing the learning rate decay:
• Step decay: Reduce the learning rate by some factor every few epochs. Typical values
might be reducing the learning rate by a half every 5 epochs, or by 0.1 every 20 epochs.

These numbers depend heavily on the type of problem and the model. One heuristic you
may see in practice is to watch the validation error while training with a fixed learning
rate, and reduce the learning rate by a constant (e.g. 0.5) whenever the validation error
stops improving.
• Exponential decay has the mathematical form α = α e−kt, where α ,k are hyperpa-
0 0
rameters and is the iteration number (but you can also use units of epochs).
• 1/t decay has the mathematical form α = α0 where α ,k are hyperparameters and is
1+Kt 0
the iteration number.
In practice, we find that the step decay dropout is slightly preferable because the hyperpa-
rameters it involves (the fraction of decay and the step timings in units of epochs) are more
interpretable than the hyperparameter k. Lastly, if you can afford the computational budget,
err on the side of slower decay and train for a longer time.
NoticethatAdagrad,RMSPropandAdamalreadyhavealearningdecay. Whenusingthismeth-
odsitmayhelpalittlebitalsoaddingalearningdecaymethod. ForSGDandSGD+Momentum
you should always add the learning decay.
Second Order Optimization Methods
The advantages of second order optimization methods are: faster convergence and no hyper-
parameters. However they are not normally used because they are to heavy, to much staff
happening, and they use too much memory. It is preferable just to use first order methods.
The idea of second order methods is that they approximate the loss function in a more precise
way. As first order methods, they approximate with an hyperplane of like which way are we
sloping. Also they also approximate with Hessian (H) which is telling you how is this surface
curving. So you need the gradient for the sloping estimation and the Hessian for the surface
curvature.
For example in the Newton method, ones you have form this bowl like Hessian approximation
to you objective function, you can use this information to jump directly to the minimum of that
approximation, and you keep iterating this strategy.
1
J(θ) ≈ J(θ )+(θ−θ )T (cid:52) J(θ )+ (θ−θ )TH(θ−θ )θ∗ = θ −H−1(cid:52) J(θ ) (8.7)
0 0 θ 0 0 0 0 θ 0
2
This method is impractical to train DNNs because it would take too much memory. So imagine
you have 10 million parameters, then your Hessian matrix would of size 10 million by 10 million
and then you want to invert it, so good luck.

There is a variant of the Newton method called BGFS which approximates the inverse Hessian
with rank 1 over time so you do not need to compute the inverse of the Hessian but still requires
to store the gigantic matrix in memory.
Another extension called L-BGFS does not require you to store all the full inverse matrix.
This method is used some time to train DNNs. It usually works very good in full batch and
deterministic functions with no stochastic settings. However, it does not transfer very well to
mini-batch settings because the approximation it is doing of the Hessian matrix are incorrect
when you switch the batch. Also, it does not work well with stochastic settings, so you have to
removeallsourcesofrandomness(e.g. dropout). Still,itistoheavy,tomuchstaffishappening,f
and it is better just to use first order methods.
Summary
• Adam is a good default choice in most cases. Some times it helps adding learning rate
decaylikestepdecayorexponentialdecayeven-thoughAdamalreadyhasinsidealearning
decay.
• If you can afford to do full batch updates then try out L-BFGS (do not forget to disable
all sources of noise/randomness)
• Decay your learning rate over the period of the training. For example, halve the learning
rate after a fixed number of epochs, or whenever the validation accuracy tops off.
IMPORTANT NOTATION!!: Through all this chapter I am saying parameters = weights, but
remember that there are other ones like the bias.

Chapter 9
Dropout
Figure 9.1: Dropout
“Randomlyset %50someneuronstozerointheforwardpass.”Theretwowaysofunderstanding
why this works:
• This makes the network unable to relay on a single feature. Thus, forcing it to generate
redundant representation. In this way, you will be representing an object with redundant
descriptors, detectors, etc. So in test time, if some features can not be detected, you still
can really on the other ones.
Figure 9.2: Relay on multiple features
• It can also be seen as training a large ensemble of models that share parameters. When
applying a mask to shutdown some randomly neurons at the forward pass this mask stays
there for the backward pass. Thus, in the backprop step, no gradient will flow through
53

the neurons that were shut off to zero; so its weights to the previous layer will not be
updated. In other words, the neurons that were dropout do not update their connections
to the previous layer, just as if they were not there. With dropout you are subsampeling
a part of your neural network and training it with the current example. So each binary
mask is one model which gets trained on only one datapoint (or more in the case that
two random mask are equal during training).
WARNING:Ifdropoutisnotworkingforyou, youshouldprobablybeusingabiggernetwork.
Train time
During the forward pass set 50% of the neurons to 0. To get an idea the code below shows a
naive implementation of dropout
”””VanillaDropout:Notrecommendedimplementation(seenotesbelow)”””
p=0.5#probabilityofkeepingaunitactive.higher=lessdropout
deftrain_step(X):
”””Xcontainsthedata”””
#forwardpassforexample3−layerneuralnetwork
H1=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W1,X)+b1)
U1=np.random.rand(∗H1.shape)<p#firstdropoutmask
H1∗=U1#drop!
H2=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W2,H1)+b2)
U2=np.random.rand(∗H2.shape)<p#seconddropoutmask
H2∗=U2#drop!
out=np.dot(W3,H2)+b3
#backwardpass:computegradients...(notshown)
#performparameterupdate...(notshown)
Test time
At test time ideally we would like to integrate out all the noise (not possible). A Monte Carlo
approximation would be: do many forward passes with different dropout masks, average all
predictions. Unfortunately its not time efficient. Instead, you can approximate this method
without not droping out any unit in the forward pass during testing but we have to be careful.
Example
Imagine this linear NN and a dropout prob = 0.5. During training time the expected value is
the average between all the possible masks activation value. However, if we use all the neurons

Figure 9.3: Example
in test time, the activation value is going to be twice the expected value in train time. So it
is easy to see that this half comes from the fact that at train time we dropout neurons with
probability 50%.
With p = 0.5 dropout prob, using all inputs in the forward pass would inflate the activations
by 2x from what the network was ”used to” during training. Thus, you have to compensate by
scaling the activations back down by 1/2. In this way, the ouput at test time is equal to the
expected output at training time. Let’s see a naive implementation:
”””VanillaDropout:Notrecommendedimplementation(seenotesbelow)”””
p=0.5#probabilityofkeepingaunitactive.higher=lessdropout
defpredict(X):
#ensembledforwardpass
H1=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W1,X)+b1)∗p#NOTE:scaletheactivations
H2=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W2,H1)+b2)∗p#NOTE:scaletheactivations
out=np.dot(W3,H2)+b3
A better way of implementing dropout is using ”inverted dropout”. The idea is very simple,
instead of multiplying the activation values by the dropout probability during test time, divide
the training activation values by the dropout probability during train time. In this way, test
time is unchanged.
”””
InvertedDropout:Recommendedimplementationexample.
Wedropandscaleattraintimeanddon'tdoanythingattesttime.
”””
p=0.5#probabilityofkeepingaunitactive.higher=lessdropout
deftrain_step(X):
#forwardpassforexample3−layerneuralnetwork
H1=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W1,X)+b1)
U1=(np.random.rand(∗H1.shape)<p)/p#firstdropoutmask.Notice/p!
H1∗=U1#drop!
H2=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W2,H1)+b2)
U2=(np.random.rand(∗H2.shape)<p)/p#seconddropoutmask.Notice/p!
H2∗=U2#drop!
out=np.dot(W3,H2)+b3

#backwardpass:computegradients...(notshown)
#performparameterupdate...(notshown)
defpredict(X):
#ensembledforwardpass
H1=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W1,X)+b1)#noscalingnecessary
H2=np.maximum(0,np.dot(W2,H1)+b2)
out=np.dot(W3,H2)+b3
There is a method to dropout single weights instead of full neurons call dropconnect

Chapter 10
Hyper-Parameters selection and
babysitting
Sanity test
Make sure that you can overfit very small portion of the training data. Take 20 samples, turn
off regularization and make sure that you can get a loss of 0. If you can’t overfit there is a
problem: or there is something broken or you have to scale up your network.
Learning Rate
Start with small regularization (0.00001) and find learning rate that makes the loss not go
down. Then, find learning rate that makes the loss go down but at some point it explodes. The
learning rate is in between this range.
Figure 10.1: Left: Loss exploding, Right: Loss not going down
• Loss not going down: learning rate too low. Something funny can happen in this case.
Lossnotgoingdownbutaccuracyimprovinguntil 20%. Howisthatpossible? Sobecause
57

of the way softmax is computed, small changes in the lost can cause small changes in the
scores which make the correct class has a tiny bigger score than the others. This, makes
the softmax classifier get more samples correct.
• Loss exploding (NaN happens): learning rate too high
Hyperparameter Optimization - Coarse to fine serach
Tuning regularization and learning rate. Do coarse -¿ fine for cross-validation in stages. In
other words, first do a rough search, see what it works, and keep iterating to longer narrow in
ranges that are working. First, only a few epochs to get rough idea of what parameters work
(few minutes is enough). Second, longer running time, finer search.
Also, it is better to optimize parameters in log space because reg and learning rate work ma-
nipulatively in the dynamics of your back propagation.
Figure 10.2: First pass - coarse search
Figure 10.3: Second pass - finer search. Notice that there is a problem with this result. The
best result (last red box) has a lr close to the boundary of search that we have set (-3). So it
may we better results waiting for lower values of lr. Careful with best values on border

Hyper-parameter Optimization - NEVER do grid (iterative) search
of parameters, do random search
Figure 10.4: Second pass - finer search. Notice that there is a problem with this result. The
best result (last red box) has a lr close to the boundary of search that we have set (-3). So it
may we better results waiting for lower values of lr. Careful with best values on border
For cross-validation, use random search in stead of grid search. The issue is that one of the
parameters may be much important than another one.
In this figure in particular its more important the x than the y dimension. Then, with random
sampling, your are going to evaluate more different samples of the x parameter space (9 with
random vs 3 with grid).
Hyper-parameter Optimization - Monitor and visualize the loss
curve
Figure 10.5: In this left case the loss is too slow... The learning rate is too low
Hyper-parameter Optimization - Monitor and visualize the ac-
curacy
The gap between the training and validation accuracy indicates the amount of overfitting. Two
possible cases are shown in the diagram on the left. The blue validation error curve shows very

Figure 10.6: Monitor and visualize the accuracy
smallvalidationaccuracycomparedtothetrainingaccuracy, indicatingstrongoverfitting(note,
it’spossibleforthevalidationaccuracytoevenstarttogodownaftersomepoint). Whenyousee
this in practice you probably want to increase regularization (stronger L2 weight penalty, more
dropout, etc.) or collect more data. The other possible case is when the validation accuracy
tracks the training accuracy fairly well. This case indicates that your model capacity is not high
enough: make the model larger by increasing the number of parameters.
• gap between trainval is too big: overfitting, increase regularization
• gap between trainval too small: increase model capacity
In this figure case there is a big gap so it is probably over-fitting. We should increase the
regularization factor.
Hyper-parameter Optimization - Track the ratio of weight up-
dates / weight magnitudes
You want weight updates / weight magnitudes = 0.001.
• If this is too high to decrease learning rate
• If it is too low to increase learning rate
Dropout not working
If dropout is not working for you, you should probably be using a bigger network.

Chapter 11
Other definitions
11.1 Embedding
An embedding maps an input representation, such as a word or sentence, into a vector. A
popular type of embedding are word embeddings such as word2vec or GloVe. We can also
embed sentences, paragraphs or images. For example, by mapping images and their textual
descriptions into a common embedding space and minimizing the distance between them, we
can match labels with images. Embeddings can be learned explicitly, such as in word2vec, or
as part of a supervised task, such as Sentiment Analysis. Often, the input layer of a network is
initialized with pre-trained embeddings, which are then fine-tuned to the task at hand.
11.2 Gradient Clipping
GradientClippingisatechniquetopreventexplodinggradientsinverydeepnetworks, typically
Recurrent Neural Networks. There exist various ways to perform gradient clipping, but the a
commononeistonormalizethegradientsofaparametervectorwhenitsL2normexceedsacer-
tainthresholdaccordingtonew gradients = gradients * threshold / l2 norm(gradients).
11.3 Vanishing Gradient Problem
ThevanishinggradientproblemarisesinverydeepNeuralNetworks,typicallyRecurrentNeural
Networks, that use activation functions whose gradients tend to be small (in the range of 0 from
1). Because these small gradients are multiplied during backpropagation, they tend to vanish
throughout the layers, preventing the network from learning long-range dependencies. Common
ways to counter this problem is to use activation functions like ReLUs that do not suffer from
small gradients, or use architectures like LSTMs that explicitly combat vanishing gradients.
The opposite of this problem is called the exploding gradient problem.
61

Chapter 12
Tricks
Real Ensambles
• Train multiple independent models
• At test time average their results
Enjoy ∼ 2% extra performance.
Simulated Ensambles
Fake ensambles. As you are training, normally, you save a checkpoint after each epoch to figure
out what was your validation performance at that point. At test time average multiple model
checkpoints of a single model. Enjoy ∼ 1% extra performance
Average parameter vector
Keep track of (and use at test time) a running average parameter vector. params test is a
running sum exponentially decaying. One way to visualize it is the following. Think in a case
of optimizing a bowl like function and you are bouncing around the minimum, then taking the
average of all this steps gets you closer to the minimum.
whileTrue:
data_batch=dataset.sample_data_batch()
loss=network.forward(data_batch)
dparams=network.backward()
params+=update_params()//insteadofusingthisparametersattesttime
params_test=0.995∗params_test+0.005∗params//usethisones
63

This can give you a small boost.
Use float32 instead of float64
Just that. In fact if you can work with float16 do it.
ReLU bias initialization
Itisagoodpracticetoinitializethemwithaslightlypositiveinitialbiastoavoid”deadneurons”.

Chapter 13
Visualization
13.1 t-SNE visualization
Embed high-dimensional points so that locally, pairwise distances are conserved i.e. similar
things end up in similar places. Dissimilar things end up wherever. Pronounced ”tisni”.
Figure 13.1: Left: Example embedding of MNIST digits (0-9) in 2D, Right: CIFAR-10
representation warped in a square shape
More CIFAR-10 examples here
13.2 Occlusions
The idea is to create a hit map of the output probability of the CNN of the image in the left
corresponding to the correct label as you slide an occlusion across the image.
This helps you understand what are the regions which contains the most valuable features, for
the CNN, in the image.
For example, in the first row, we can observe that the probability of the left image being a
Pomeranian decreases when we cover its face.
65

Figure 13.2: Visualize with occlusions
13.3 Visualizing Activations
How can we compute the gradient of any arbitrary neuron in the network w.r.t. the image?
Figure 13.3: Visualize with occlusions
The output image gradients is not that good to understand what is going on. We will now see
two strategies to obtain ”better looking” gradients: Deconv approaches and
13.4 Deconv approaches
We are trying to see what parts of the input image are exciting a specific neuron. The idea to
get a better looking gradient image is only to take into account the positive gradients. In this
way we remove the noise caused by mixing positive and negative gradients.
TheReLUlayeronlybackpropthegradientoftheactivationsthatwherepositiveattheforward
pass.
With Deconv, we must hack this behavior and change it so the ReLU layers only backprop
positive gradients and do not care if the forward activations where positive or negative.

Figure 13.4: Deconv approaches
Now we can show what excites a specific neuron. The figures below show a grid of neurons
at each layer. For each neuron we can see the image that arrived to that neuron and what
parts of this image excited the neuron. So the deeper the neuron the bigger the area of the
original image it observes. Also, it can be seen that the deeper the neuron the higher feature
representation.
Figure 13.5: Deconv approaches layers 1 and 2
Figure 13.6: Deconv approaches layer 3

Figure 13.7: Deconv approaches layers 4 and 5
13.5 Optimization to image
How can we find an image that maximizes some class score?
Figure 13.8: Optimize an image to maximize the score of a specific class
Figure 13.9: Optimize an image to maximize the score of a specific class output

13.6 Visualizing Data Gradients
1. Feed an input image
2. Set the gradient of the scores vector be [0,0,..,0,1,0,...0] where 1 is the ground-truth label
class of the image
3. Backprop to the image
4. For each pixel of the image store the max gradient value across all the channels
5. Plot the gradients
Figure 13.10: Data gradients output
The interpretation of the results are that the staff that is black is not influencing the score of
the image. So you can wiggle them and the score will not change. So at the end it is telling you
the are of the image that is influencing the network.
13.7 DeepDream
Figure 13.11: DeepDream output
DeepDream link
ItnormallyhallucinatealotofdogsbecausetherearealotofdogsamplesinImageNet(because
there are a lot of different dog classes).
Attheend, theonlythingDeepDreamisdoingis: givenalayerimmediatelyafteraReLUlayer,
it sets the gradients equal to the activation values. So if you iteratively update the image with
the gradients, you are modifying the image to increase whatever it is exiting the selected layer.

Figure 13.12: DeepDream code
In other words, DeepDream modifies the image in a way that “boosts all activations. This
creates a feedback loop: e.g. any slightly detected dog face will be made more and more dog
like over time.
13.8 DeepArt
Explained at cs231n lecture 9
13.9 Adversarial data - Fooling networks
It is very simple to fool a CNN. Images are super high dimensional objects (one dimension
for each pixel). The training images are constrained to a small manifold and we are training
ConvNets over it. The trained ConvNet works extremely well inside that manifold, but outside
of it is complete random.
Figure 13.13: Adversarial data examples

The think is that during the forward pass we are applying dot product over all the dimensions
of the data (one per pixel) so if we change the input a tiny bit but all in the correct way, the
dot product output is going to change a lot.
Figure 13.14: Adversarial data case example
This is not a problem of deep learning, its is a problem in learning in general. There are some
ways of decreasing this effect. One is to train also with adversarial examples; it will be more
robust to them but the classifier accuracy will decrease. Another one is to instead of classifying
the hole image, classify chunks.

Part III
LAYERS
73

Chapter 14
Input Layer
The input layer (that contains the image) should be divisible by 2 many times. Common
numbers include 32 (e.g. CIFAR-10), 64, 96 (e.g. STL-10), or 224 (e.g. common ImageNet
ConvNets), 384, and 512.
75

Chapter 15
Convolutional layer
Structure
• Accepts a volume of size W ×H ×D
1 1 1
• Requires four hyperparameters:
– Number of filters K
– their spatial extent F
– the stride S
– the amount of zero padding P
• Produces a volume of size W ×H ×D where:
2 2 2
– W = W1−F+2P
2 S+1
– H = H1−F+2P
2 S+1
– D = K
2
• With parameter sharing, it introduces FFD weights per filter, for a total of FFD K
1 1
weights and K biases.
• The filters depth is always equal to the input volume depth.
• The output volume depth is equal to the number of filters
• In the output volume, the d-th depth slice (of size W ×H is the result of performing
2 2
a valid convolution of the d-th filter over the input volume with a stride of S, and then
offset by d-th bias.
• Normally, in the same conv layer, all filters have the same dimensions so that special
optimized routines can be invoked.
77

Explanation
In a convolution layer we have filters. Each filter is a weight matrix which is convoluted over the
input volume. Each time the filter is applied it outputs a single value. The result of convolving
the filter over all the input volume is another volume called activation map. A filter’s depth is
always equal to the input volume depth. You can imagine a filter as a neuron.
Figure 15.1: Convolution filter
Instead of having only one filter, we have a stack of filter which produce a stack of activation
maps (one for each filter). In this example this conv layer has a stack of 6 filters (5×5×3).
All positions in the same activation map share the same weights (filter)
Figure 15.2: 6 convolution filters output
Figure15.3: Exampleofaconvlayerwith2filters(3×3×3)overaninputvolumeof(7×7×3)
with 1 padding, which produces and output map of (3×3×2)

Figure 15.4: Example of the activation maps produced in a convolution layer. The small
images on top are the stack of filters, the image on the right the input volume, and the grey-
scale images the activation maps. White corresponds to high activations and black to low
activations. Notice for example, that the filter marked in blue has an orange part, so when
you slide this filter through the input image there are a lot of high activations in the area
corresponding to the orange part of the input image. The output of this convolutional layer is
going to be a stack of all these activation matrices.
Padding Add zeros around the input volume. The output volume decreases after each conv
layer, so if we would not pad, the size of the activation maps will decrease very fast and after a
few layers the volume would be 1×1×?. This behavior is not desired because in deep learning
we want to have a lot of layers. Why padding with zeros and not an extension of the image for
example? Because in this way the padded cells do not contribute to the filter.
Choosing hyperparameters Should be using small filters (e.g. 3 × 3 or at most 5 × 5),
using a stride of S = 1, and crucially, padding the input volume with zeros in such way that
the conv layer does not alter the spatial dimensions of the input. A common setting of the
hyperparameters are: F = 3,S = 1,P = 1; F = 5,S = 1,P = 2; F = 5,S = 2,P =?and
F = 1,S = 1,P = 0. K is usually a power of two value (e.g. 32,64,128,512) because libraries
normally have optimized routines. If you must use bigger filter sizes (such as 7×7 or so), it is
only common to see this on the very first conv layer that is looking at the input image. For a
general F, it can be seen that P = (F −1)/2 preserves the input size.
Parameter sharing In an activation map, all the positions (neurons) share the same weights
(filter). It makes sense to share weights because for example if the filter is searching for edges,
it makes sense that it search edges in all the image. Moreover, sharing weights spatially avoids
over-fitting the filter. It also helps reducing the number of parameters.
Backpropagation The backward pass for a convolution operation (for both the data and the
weights) is also a convolution (but with spatially-flipped filters). This is easy to derive in the
1-dimensional case with a toy example (not expanded on for now).
1×1 convolution As an aside, several papers use 1×1 convolutions, as first investigated
by Network in Network. Some people are at first confused to see 1×1 convolutions especially
when they come from signal processing background. Normally signals are 2-dimensional so 1×1

convolutions do not make sense (its just pointwise scaling). However, in ConvNets this is not
the case because one must remember that we operate over 3-dimensional volumes, and that the
filters always extend through the full depth of the input volume. For example, if the input is
[32×32×3] then doing 1×1 convolutions would effectively be doing 3-dimensional dot products
(since the input depth is 3 channels).
Dilated convolutions A recent development (e.g. see paper by Fisher Yu and Vladlen
Koltun) is to introduce one more hyperparameter to the CONV layer called the dilation. So
far weve only dicussed CONV filters that are contiguous. However, its possible to have filters
that have spaces between each cell, called dilation. As an example, in one dimension a filter
w of size 3 would compute over input x the following: w[0]*x[0] + w[1]*x[1] + w[2]*x[2].
This is dilation of 0. For dilation 1 the filter would instead compute w[0]*x[0] + w[1]*x[2]
+ w[2]*x[4]; In other words there is a gap of 1 between the applications. This can be very
usefulinsomesettingstouseinconjunctionwith0-dilatedfiltersbecauseitallowsyoutomerge
spatial information across the inputs much more agressively with fewer layers. For example,
if you stack two 3x3 CONV layers on top of each other than you can convince yourself that
the neurons on the 2nd layer are a function of a 5×5 patch of the input (we would say that
the effective receptive field of these neurons is 5×5). If we use dilated convolutions then this
effective receptive field would grow much quicker.
The power of small filters
Figure 15.5: Network in network
3 Conv layers of 3×3 filters have the same receptive field as a 1 Conv layer of 7×7 filters. But
lets compare both options:
Suppose input is H ×W ×C and we use convolutions with C filters to preserve depth (stride
1, padding to preserve H, W)
• three CONV with 3×3 filters
– Number of weights: 3×C ×(3×3×C) = 27C2
– Number of multiply-adds: 3×(H ×W ×C)×(3×3×C) = 27HWC2
• one CONV with 7×7 filters

– Number of weights: C ×(7×7×C) = 49C2
– Number of multiply-adds: (Hx×W ×C)×(7×7×C) = 49HWC2
So 3 Conv layers of 3×3 filters have the same receptive field of a larger Conv layer of 7×7
filters but have a lower computation and memory complexity. Moreover, if we have ReLU layers
after each Conv layer the 3 Conv layer option is more nonlinear (good).
Lets get crazy. ResNet and GoogLeNet go one step further and use 1x1 filters all over the place
to even reduce further the number of parameters. This is commonly known as ”Network in
Network”

Chapter 16
Pooling layer
Structure
• Accepts a volume of size
• Requires two hyperparameters: W ×H ×D
1 1 1
– their spatial extent F
– the stride S
• Produces a volume of size where: W ×H ×D
2 2 2
– W = W1−F +1
2 S
– H = H1−F +1
2 S
– D = D
2 1
• Introduces zero parameters since it computes a fixed function of the input
• Note that it is not common to use zero-padding for Pooling layers
• Has NO parameters
Explanation
It is common to periodically insert a Pooling layer in-between successive Conv layers in a
ConvNetarchitecture. Itsfunctionistoprogressivelyreducethespatialsizeoftherepresentation
to reduce the amount of parameters and computation in the network, and hence to also control
overfitting. This down sampling operations happens on each activation map independently and
the volume depth is preserved. The most common way of pooling is max pooling, another one
is average pooling but it does not work that well.
83

The most common form is a pooling layer with filters of size 2×2 applied with a stride of 2
downsamples every depth slice in the input by 2 along both width and height, discarding 75%
of the activations. Every MAX operation would in this case be taking a max over 4 numbers
(little 2×2 region in some depth slice). The depth dimension remains unchanged.
Notice that the pooling layer has NO parameters!!
Figure 16.1: In this example, the input volume of size [224×224×64] is pooled with filter
size 2, stride 2 into output volume of size [112×112×64]. Notice that the volume depth is
preserved.
Figure 16.2: The most common downsampling operation is max, giving rise to max pooling,
here shown with a stride of 2. That is, each max is taken over 4 numbers (little 2×2 square).
Choosing hyperparameters There are 2 common setting of the hyperparameters. F =
2,S = 2 that this discards exactly 75% of the activations in an input volume (due to down-
sampling by 2 in both width and height). Another slightly less common setting is t. It is very
uncommontoseereceptivefieldsizesformaxpoolingthatarelargerthan3becausethepooling
is then too lossy and aggressive. This usually leads to worse performance.
Backpropagation Recall from the backpropagation chapter that the backward pass for a
max(x,y) operation has a simple interpretation as only routing the gradient to the input that
had the highest value in the forward pass. Hence, during the forward pass of a pooling layer it
is common to keep track of the index of the max activation (sometimes also called the switches)
so that gradient routing is efficient during backpropagation.

Getting rid of pooling Many people dislike the pooling operation and think that we can
get away without it. For example, Striving for Simplicity: The All Convolutional Net proposes
to discard the pooling layer in favor of architecture that only consists of repeated CONV layers.
To reduce the size of the representation they suggest using larger stride in CONV layer once
in a while. Discarding pooling layers has also been found to be important in training good
generative models, such as variational autoencoders (VAEs) or generative adversarial networks
(GANs). It seems likely that future architectures will feature very few to no pooling layers.

Chapter 17
Batch Normalization layer
You have a minibatch of data and you are taking it through your network. You have inserted
batch normalization layers through the layer which take your input x and make sure that every
feature dimension across the batch you have unit gaussian activations.
Basic Idea
Batch normalization potentially helps in two ways: faster learning and higher overall accuracy.
Theimprovedmethodalsoallowsyoutouseahigherlearningrate,potentiallyprovidinganother
boost in speed.
Why does this work? Well, we know that normalization (shifting inputs to zero-mean and unit
variance) is often used as a pre-processing step to make the data comparable across features.
As the data flows through a deep network, the weights and parameters adjust those values,
sometimes making the data too big or too small again - a problem the authors refer to as
”internal covariate shift”. By normalizing the data in each mini-batch, this problem is largely
avoided.
Basically, rather than just performing normalization once in the beginning, you’re doing it all
over place. Of course, this is a drastically simplified view of the matter (since for one thing, I’m
completely ignoring the post-processing updates applied to the entire network), but hopefully
this gives a good high-level overview.
Adding batch normalization normally slows 30%.
Extended explanation
So image you have N samples in your minibatch and D features / neuron activations at
some points. So this matrix of X is the input to the batch normalization layer. Evaluates
87

empirical mean and variance along every feature. So it makes sure that each column of X is
a unit gaussian. You can do this because its perfectly fine to transform it to unit Gaussian
because it is differentiable so you can backpropagate.
Figure 17.1: Compute empirical mean and variance for each dimension
So what you usually have are fully connected or convoluational layers followed by batch normal-
ization layer before the non-linearity. So they ensure that everything is roughly unit Gaussian
at each step of the neural net. One problem is that its not clear that tanh wants exactly unit
Gaussian. Because you what tanh to be able to make its outputs more or less defused (more or
less saturated) so right now it would not be able to do that.
Figure 17.2: In network
To solve this you do not only normalize X but you also allow the network to shift by gamma
and add B. So after you have centred your data you are allowing the network through the
backprop to shift and scale the distribution. Also note that the network can learn to undo this
layer (it can learn to have the batch normalization layer to be an identity)
[2 good (from fig 1.4)] As you are swiping through different choices of initialization values with
and without batch norm you’ll see a huge difference. With batch norm it will work with much
bigger settings of the initial scale so you don’t have to worry as much, it really helps.
[3 good (from fig 1.4)] It acts somehow as a way of regularization because with batch norm
when you have some kind of input x and it goes through the network its representation in some

Figure 17.3: Equations
Figure 17.4: Algorithm
layer of the network is basically not only function of it but also whatever other examples are
with x in the batch. Normally all examples are processed independently in parallel, but batch
norm tides them together and so your representation at some layer is a function on whatever
batch you happen to be sampled in at what it does is to jigger your place in the representation
space in that layer. Which is a nice regularizer effect.
During testing it works a little different. During test you what this to be a deterministic
function. µ and σ are the once that you used during training.
Figure 17.5: During testing it works a little different

Chapter 18
Upsampling Layer (“Transposed
Convolution”)
Learnable Upsampling
Figure 18.1: From the paper: “Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation”
Transposed Convolution
Transposed convolutions – also called fractionally strided convolutions – work by swapping the
forwardandbackwardpassesofaconvolution. Onewaytoputitistonotethatthekerneldefines
a convolution, but whether its a direct convolution or a transposed convolution is determined
by how the forward and backward passes are computed.
The transposed convolution is implemented as the backward pass of a corresponding non-
transposed convolution. It can be thought of as dilating the input (by adding “stride - 1”
zeros between adjacent input elements), padding it with the needed number of zeros so it is not
out. And then, apply the convolution with the filter flipped 180 degrees.
91

Figure 18.2: Left: Visually, for a transposed convolution with stride one and no padding, we
just pad the original input (blue entries) with zeroes (white entries). Right: Stride two and
padding, the transposed convolution would look like this
Skip Connections
Figure 18.3: Skip Connections

Chapter 19
Fully Connected Layer
FC layers, also called affine layers, produce the high-level reasoning in the DNN. Neurons
in a fully connected layer have full connections to all activations in the previous layer, as in
regularNeuralNetworks. Theiractivationscanhencebecomputedwithamatrixmultiplication
followed by a bias offset.
93

Chapter 20
Highway Layer
A Highway Layer is a type of Neural Network layer that uses a gating mechanism to control the
information flow through a layer. Stacking multiple Highway Layers allows for training of very
deep networks. Highway Layers work by learning a gating function that chooses which parts of
the inputs to pass through and which parts to pass through a transformation function, such as
a standard affine layer for example. The basic formulation of a Highway Layer is T * h(x) +
(1 - T) * x, where T is the learned gating function with values between 0 and 1, h(x) is an
arbitrary input transformation and x is the input. Note that all of these must have the same
size.
95

Part IV
NETWORKS
97

Chapter 21
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
A recurrent neural network (RNN) is a class of artificial neural network where connections
between units form a directed cycle. This creates an internal state of the network which allows
it to exhibit dynamic temporal behavior. Unlike feedforward neural networks, RNNs can use
their internal memory to process arbitrary sequences of inputs. This makes them applicable to
tasks such as unsegmented connected handwriting recognition or speech recognition.
Figure 21.1: RNN
Notice that the same function and the same set of parameters are used at very time step! We
can not have RNNs of enormous length because we have to store in memory the hidden state of
each time step to be able to back-propagate. Normally we will have RNNs of max 25 length.
To process bigger sequences we will divide the sequence in chunks of 25 and the last hidden
state of a chunk is the initial hidden state of the next chunk.
Let’s see some wire examples (fig 1.2):
Figure 21.2: RNN examples
99

1. Vanilla Neural Networks
2. Image Captioning (image to sequence of words)
3. Sentiment Classification (sequence of words to sentiment)
4. Machine Translation (seq of words to seq of words)
5. Video classification on frame level
We can stack RNNs together to produce deeper RNN. In figure 1.4 case we have stack 3 RNNs.
It still works the same as before but now we have 3 weights.
Figure 21.3: Stacked RNNs
Practical Example
Lets create a RNN that given a sequence of characters predicts the next one. The output is
always the prob of each letter in the vocabulary to be the next character:
• Vocabulary: [h,l,e,o]
• Example training sequence: ”hello”
For this example we will use a Vanilla RNN:
h = tanh(W h +W x ) (21.1)
t hh t−1 xh t
y = W h (21.2)
t hy t
h = 0 (21.3)
0
A 100 lines of code implementation of a character recognition in python is implemented here:
https://gist.github.com/karpathy/d4dee566867f8291f086

Figure 21.4: Practical example. You can see this blue boxes being softmax classifier, in other
words, at each time step there is a softmax classifier.
Image Captioning
Example using RNN for image captioning
Figure 21.5: ”Deep Visual-Semantic Alignments for Generating Image Descriptions”, Karpa-
thy and Fei-Fei
21.1 LSTM
Normally we will not use Vanilla RNNs, instead, all papers use LSTM. It is very similar, it stills
take into account the input and the last state but now the combination of both is more complex
and works better. With RNN we have one vector h at each time step. But with LSTM we have
two vectors at each time step h and c . Moreover in RNNs the repeating module only has one
t t
layer, tanh. Instead, LSTM has four.

Figure 21.6: Left: RNN with h(green), Right: LSTM with h(hidden vector, green) and c
(cell state vector, yellow)
How do they work?
Figure 21.7: LSTM first equation diagram
where:
• c cells. Are best though as counters
• h hidden states
• hl−1 vector from below of size n×1 (x in the figure)
t
• hl vector from before of size n×1 (h in the figure)
t−1
• i ∈ [0,1] to chose if we want to add, or not, to a cell
• f ∈ [0,1] forget gate to reset cells to 0

• o ∈ [0,1] to choose which cells are used to produce
• g ∈ [−1,1] to add −1 or 1 to a cell
The key to LSTMs is the cell state, the horizontal line running through the top of the diagram.
The cell state is kind of like a conveyor belt. It runs straight down the entire chain, with only
someminorlinearinteractions. Itsveryeasyforinformationtojustflowalongitunchanged. The
LSTM does have the ability to remove or add information to the cell state, carefully regulated
by structures called gates.
Think of i,f,o as boolean variables, we want them to have an interpretation like a gate. They
a result of a sigmoid to make them differentiable. They allow us to reset and add to counters,
as well as to choose what cells should be used to update hl. We can do two operations to cells
t
(counters):
• reset them with f (cid:12)cl
t−1
• add -1 or 1 with i(cid:12)g
• choose what cells should be used with o to update hl: o(cid:12)tanh(cl)
t t
Figure 21.8: LSTM diagram
Step by step
First Decide what information were going to throw away from the cell state. This decision
is made by a sigmoid layer called the “forget gate layer. It looks at h and x , and outputs a
t1 t
number between 0 and 1 for each number in the cell state C . A 1 represents “completely keep
t1
this while a 0 represents “completely get rid of this. For example, in a language model trying
to predict the next word based on all the previous ones the cell state might include the gender
of the present subject, so that the correct pronouns can be used. When we see a new subject,
we want to forget the gender of the old subject.

Figure 21.9: First, decide what information were going to throw away from the cell state
Second Decidewhatnewinformationweregoingtostoreinthecellstate. Thishastwoparts.
First, a sigmoid layer called the “input gate layer decides which values well update. Next, a
tanh layer creates a vector of new candidate values, C(cid:101)t , that could be added to the state. In
the next step, well combine these two to create an update to the state. For example, in the
example of our language model, wed want to add the gender of the new subject to the cell state,
to replace the old one were forgetting.
Figure 21.10: Second, decide what information were going to store in the cell state
Third Update the old cell state, C , into the new cell state CtCt. The previous steps already
t1
decided what to do, we just need to actually do it. We multiply the old state by f , forgetting
t
the things we decided to forget earlier. Then we add i
t
C(cid:101)t . This is the new candidate values,
scaled by how much we decided to update each state value. In the case of the language model,
this is where wed actually drop the information about the old subjects gender and add the new
information, as we decided in the previous steps.
Figure 21.11: Third, update the old cell state
Fourth Finally, we cide what were going to output. This output will be based on our cell
state, but will be a filtered version. First, we run a sigmoid layer which decides what parts
of the cell state were going to output. Then, we put the cell state through tanh (to push the

values to be between 1 and 1) and multiply it by the output of the sigmoid gate, so that we only
output the parts we decided to. For the language model example, since it just saw a subject,
it might want to output information relevant to a verb, in case thats what is coming next. For
example, it might output whether the subject is singular or plural, so that we know what form
a verb should be conjugated into if thats what follows next.
Figure 21.12: Fourth, decide what were going to output
Variants on LSTMs
ButnotallLSTMsarethesameastheabove. Infact, itseemslikealmosteverypaperinvolving
LSTMs uses a slightly different version. The differences are minor, but its worth mentioning
some of them. Greff, et al. (2015) do a nice comparison of popular variants, finding that theyre
all about the same.
Figure 21.13: One popular LSTM variant, introduced by Gers & Schmidhuber (2000), is
adding“peepholeconnections.Thismeansthatweletthegatelayerslookatthecellstate. The
diagram adds peepholes to all the gates, but many papers will give some peepholes and not
others.
Figure21.14: Anothervariationistousecoupledforgetandinputgates. Insteadofseparately
deciding what to forget and what we should add new information to, we make those decisions
together. We only forget when were going to input something in its place. We only input new
values to the state when we forget something older.

Figure 21.15: A slightly more dramatic variation on the LSTM is the Gated Recurrent Unit,
or GRU, introduced by Cho, et al. (2014). It combines the forget and input gates into a single
“update gate. It also merges the cell state and hidden state, and makes some other changes.
TheresultingmodelissimplerthanstandardLSTMmodels,andhasbeengrowingincreasingly
popular.
These are only a few of the most notable LSTM variants. There are lots of others, like Depth
Gated RNNs by Yao, et al. (2015). Theres also some completely different approach to tackling
long-term dependencies, like Clockwork RNNs by Koutnik, et al. (2014).
Difference between RNN and LSTM
Figure 21.16: Difference between RNN (left) and LSTM (right)
• RNN transformative interaction of the state, LSTM additive interaction of the state.
• In RNN you are operating and transforming the state vector. So you are changing your
hidden state from time step to time step. Instead, LSTM has these cells states flowing
through. A subset of cells (or all of them) to compute the hidden state. Then, based
on hidden state, we decide how to operate over the cell. We can reset it and/or adding
interaction.
• RNNs look identical to plain nets, LSTMs to ResNets.
• RNNs has vanishing gradients, so you can not learn dependencies between distant time
steps.LSTMs do not have the problem of vanishing gradients. In a video in evernote

they introduce gradient noise to a layer and show how it evolves. We can see that RNN
automatically kills it while LSTM maintains it more time. This means that RNN can not
learn long term relationships.
21.1.1 Bidirectional RNN
A Bidirectional Recurrent Neural Network is a type of Neural Network that contains two RNNs
going into different directions. The forward RNN reads the input sequence from start to end,
while the backward RNN reads it from end to start. The two RNNs are stacked on top of
each others and their states are typically combined by appending the two vectors. Bidirectional
RNNs are often used in Natural Language problems, where we want to take the context from
both before and after a word into account before making a prediction.
Summary
• RNNs allow a lot of flexibility in architecture design
• Vanilla RNNs are simple but dont work very well
• Common to use LSTM or GRU: their additive interactions improve gradient flow
• Backward flow of gradients in RNN can explode or vanish. Exploding is controlled with
gradient clipping. Vanishing is controlled with additive interactions (LSTM)
• Better/simpler architectures are a hot topic of current research
• Better understanding (both theoretical and empirical) is needed.

Chapter 22
Autoencoders
The idea of autoencoders is that we want to force a network to try to reconstruct our data and
hopefully it will learn a useful representation of the data. For traditional autoencoders this is
use for feature learning and for variational atoencoders to generate fake samples.
22.1 Traditional Autoencoder
Figure 22.1: Traditional Autoencoder
Normallyencoderwillbea4-layerconv,andthedecodera4-layerupconv. Sometimestheyshare
weights (in fact they are the same, we only have to transpose them): dim(x) = D,dim(z) = H,
w : H ×D,w : D×H = wT.
e d e
The idea is to pass the input data through an encoder network that will produce features z.
This step can be thought as PCA. We are transforming the input data and transforming it into
another feature representation. The encoder network is usually a ReLU CNN. Normally z is
smaller than x (dimensionality reduction).
The problem is that we do not have any explicit labels to use to know which information is
relevant and which one its not to decide how to make the dimensionality reduction. To decide
which is the most relevant data we reconstruct the input data only with the information in the
z features and compare the reconstruction with the original image.
109

Specially if the z features are small, hopefully, it will force the network to summarize the useful
statistics and to discover useful features of the input image.
How do we train them?
Figure 22.2: Traditional Autoencoder
Normally it is trained as a regular NN with euclidean distance as the loss function comparing
the input data vs the reconstructed data.
Normally, after training, the decoder will be thrown away.
Unsupervised + Supervised learning
Figure 22.3: Traditional Autoencoder
The idea is first to train the network with unsupervised data, and then fine tune with a small
labeleddataset. Thisideaisbeautifulinthesensethatwecouldtrainournetworkswithmillions
of unlabeled data from the internet, and the fine tune the network with a labeled dataset such
us KITTI. The problem is that is yet not working that well.
22.2 Variational Autoencoder
Transforming traditional autoencoders to Bayesian, allows us to generate data.
We assume that it exists a distribution with parameters φ∗ that is generating the latent states
z from x (given x we can sample z): q (z|x)
φ∗

Figure 22.4: Variational Autoencoder
We also assume a conditional distribution with parameters θ∗ that given the latent states we
can sample x: p (x|z(i))
θ∗
We assume that these distributions are diagonal Gaussian and we will try to approximate them
with two neural nets with parameters φ and θ. Also, we assume p (z) unit Gaussian. We could
θ∗
assume more fancy distributions, but we use these ones because they are easy to work with.
1. Input data x
2. Pass x through the encoder network which will spit out a distribution of the latent states
z ( the mean and (diagonal) covariance of q (z|x)).
φ
3. Sample latent states of high probability from the obtained distribution q (z|x) given our
φ
input data x.
4. Once we have some samples of z, pass them trough the decoder which will spit out the
distribution of the input data x ( the mean and (diagonal) covariance of p (x|z(i)))
θ∗
5. Finally, we can sample data xx of high probability from the obtained distribution p (x|z)
θ
given the latent variables z. xx should be similar to x.
Generate fake data
We train Variational Autoencoders as a normal autoencoder: reconstruction loss at the end,
regularization toward prior in the middle. After the network is trained we can use it to generate
fake data.
1. We first sample from the prior distribution p (z) which we have assumed that it is unit
θ
Gaussian so it is really easy to draw random samples from this distribution.
2. Pass a sample through the decoder network which we have trained during tinning. The
decoder will spit out a distribution over our data points x in terms of both a mean and
covariance

3. Once we have a mean and a covariance, we have a the p (x|z) which is also easy to sample
θ
from because we have assume that is diagonal Gaussian. This samples are going to be
new fake data xx
Figure 22.5: Generate data with Variational Autoencoder
To try figuring out what the decoder network has learn we can densely sample all the latent
space.
Figure 22.6: In this example, the encoder was trained with a latent space of two dimensions.
This image was generated by passing each point of this 2D latent space through the decoder.
It can be seen that the net has learn to interpolate the digits. For example, we can see 6s
transforming to 0s.
One of the reasons that is making this nice separation of classes between axes, is that we are
assuming diagonal distribution. Thus, we are assuming as a prior to our system that latent
variables (axis in the latent space) are independent (there is no relation between them).
Figure 22.7: Example of dense sampling of the latent space
In the CS231n course - lecture 14 there is more information explaining that it is not possible to
use maximum likelihood and explaining how to solve this situation.

All together
A recent paper (Dosovitskiy and Brox, Generating Images with Perceptual Similarity Metrics
based on Deep Networks, arXiv 2016) proposes a method to mix all together to make the fake
images more realistic.
Figure 22.8: All together to generate better images
Overview
The idea of autoencoders is that we want to force a network to try to reconstruct our data and
hopefully it will learn a useful representation of the data. For traditional autoencoders this is
use for feature learning and for variational atoencoders to generate fake samples.
• Traditional Autoencoders
– Try to reconstruct input
– Used to learn features, initialize supervised model
– Not used much anymore
• Variational Autoencoders
– Bayesian meets deep learning
– Sample from model to generate images

Chapter 23
Generative Adversarial Nets
A strategy to generate images with less math than Variational Autoencoders.
The idea is to start with a random noise that is normally drawn from a unit Gaussian (or some-
thing similar) and we will pass it through a Generator network. The Generator network looks
very much like the decoder on the autoencoder and spits fake images. Then, a discriminator
network is responsible for deciding/estimating if the input image is fake or a real.
Figure 23.1: GAN
How to we train them?
Figure 23.2: GAN
We train this network all together. The Generator will receive minibatches of random noise, at
it will spit fake images. The Discriminator will receive batches partially fake and real; and it
will try to decide which ones are real and which ones are fake.
115

The generator will improve its fake images by trying to trick the discriminator.
Examples
Interpolating random noise vectors. In figure 1.3 the images in the left and right extremes are
obtained by sampling two random points (vectors) of the z space and passing them through
the generative net. Then the interpolation between pairs of extreme images is performed by
interpolating the z vectors and passing them through the generative net.
Figure 23.3: Interpolating random noise vectors
Another experiment shows that the generator is learning a useful representation of the data. In
this experiment they randomly generated multiple images of faces and then manually organized
in the classes ”smiling woman”, ”neutral woman”, ”neutral man”. Then, they produce the
mean z average representation of each image and perform the arithmetic operation of z smiling
woman-z neutral woman+z neutral man produces a smiling man.
Figure 23.4: Generator learning a useful representation of the data

Chapter 24
Region Based CNN (R-CNN)
R-CNN (Region based CNN) are used for object detection. Another network also used for
objection detection is YOLO (You only look once)
24.1 R-CNN (do not use this method, deprecated)
Figure 24.1: R-CNN
So the idea for object detection is to use R-CNN. First run a region proposal algorithm to
obten regions of interets. Then, warp this regions into a fixed size and run the ConvNet with
regression head and classification head. The regression head objective is to output an offset to
correct ”slightly wrong” region proposals.
R-CNN probelms:
• Slow at test-time: need to run full forward pass of CNN for each region proposal
117

• SVMs and regressors are post-hoc: CNN features not updated in response to SVMs and
regressors
• Complex multistage training pipeline
Train a R-CNN
1.- Train (or download) a classification model (e.g. AlexNet). 2.- Fine-tune model for
Figure 24.2: Train
detection. Instead of X classes you want Y classes + background. To do so, throw away the
final fully-connected layer, add the new one and retrain using positive/negative regions from
detection images. 3.- Extract features. Extract region proposals for all images. For each
Figure 24.3: Fine-tune
region: warp to CNN input size, run forward through CNN, save last pool features to disk. 4.-
Figure 24.4: Extract features
Train classification head. Train one binary SVM per class using as input the saved features
from last step.
5- Train regression head. For each class, train a linear regression model to map from cached
featurestooffsettoGTboxestomakeupfor”slightlywrong”proposalsoftheregionproposals.

Figure 24.5: Train regression head
Figure 24.6: Usual datasets for training
24.2 Fast R-CNN (do not use this method, deprecated)
A new proposal called Fast R-CNN appeared trying to solve R-CNN problems. The idea is just
to swap the order of extracting regions of interest and features. Still, no sliding windows.
Figure 24.7: Fast R-CNN training/testing time
The only mystery here are region of interest pooling.
The HxW image is processed by the convolution and pooling part and regions of interest are
proposed (with an external algorithm). The problem now is that the FC layer is expecting a
fixed size input. To solve this, given the region proposal, we project it onto the conv feature
map, divide it into hxw grid and do max-pool within each grid cell.
With this simple straggly the FC layer will always receive the same input size. Moreover, we
can backprop through this strategy with no problem because it only uses max-pool.

Figure 24.8: process
In terms of mAP (accuracy) is more or less the same The computational time improvement of
Fast R-CNN w.r.t. R-CNN is impressive:
• x8.8 training time speed up
• x25 testing time speed up (50s to 2s)

However, the bottleneck is extracting the regions with a region proposals algorithm. Without
it, the speed would be:
• x146 testing time speed up (47s to 0.32s)
so why not extracting the ROIs with the CNN? this is what Faster R-CNN proposes
24.3 Faster R-CNN
To solve the problem of region proposals algorithm botleneck in Fast R-CNN, Faster R-CNN
proposes to extract the regions of interest with another network using the information of the
last layer of the CNN net.
Insert a Region Proposal Network (RPN) after the last convolutional layer.
RPN trained to produce region proposals directly; no need for external region proposals!
AfterRPN,use RoIPoolingandan upstreamclassifierandbbox regressorjustlike Fast R-CNN
Still, the Rol pooling does not allow to introduce rotations into your regions of interests. To
introduce rotations, a DeepMind paper proposes to do bilinear interpolation similar computer
graphics.
Figure 24.9: Faster R-CNN
The cool thing here is the region proposal network, how does it work?
Build a small network for:
• Classifying object or no-object, and

• Regressing bbox locations
Use N anchor boxes at each location. Anchors are translation invariant: use the same ones at
everylocation. Forallthefeaturemappoints,attheoriginalinputimageapplyallanchorstothe
point corresponding to the current feature map point. So we take as features the convolutional
feature map region corresponding to the anchor region in the original image.
For each of this anchor boxes it produces a score weather there is an object or not; and a finer
localization with reference to the anchor (they are an offset to the anchor boxes)
So you are learning different weights for each anchor.
Figure 24.10: The cool thing here is the region proposal network, how does it work?
How to train it?
To train it, in some unpublished work, it trains the net as a net with 4 losses
One network, four losses
• RPN classification (anchor good / bad)
• RPN regression (anchor to proposal)
• Fast R-CNN classification (over classes)
• Fast R-CNN regression (proposal to box)
In terms of mAP (accuracy) is more or less the same than with Fast R-CNN The computational
time improvement of Faster R-CNN w.r.t. R-CNN is impressive: x250 testing time speed up
(50s to 0.2s)

Figure 24.11: How to train it?

Chapter 25
YOLO
YOLOs are used for object detection. Other networks also used for objection detection are
R-CNN, Fast R-CNN & Faster R-CNN.
Figure 25.1: YOLO
Another detection strategy that is also commonly used is YOLO. The idea is to solve detection
as only a regression problem. Direct prediction using a CNN.
Divide image into S ×S grid, they use S = 7. The, within each grid cell predict:
• B boxes: 4 coordinates + confidence, they use B = 2
• Class scores: C numbers
Regression from input image to output S ×S ×(5∗B+C) tensor.
It can go at real-time at the expense of lower mAP than Faster R-CNN.
125

Chapter 26
RNN ConvNet
Local motion
Figure 26.1: Getting there
Figure 26.2: Large-scale Video Classification with Convolutional Neural Networks, Karpathy
et al., 2014]
Global motion
Delving Deeper into Convolutional Networks for Learning Video Representations, Ballas et al.,
2016
127

Figure 26.3: Large-scale Video Classification with Convolutional Neural Networks, Karpathy
et al., 2014]
Figure 26.4: The idea is to modify GRU adding convolutions. The Gated Recurrent Unit
(GRU) is a simplified version of an LSTM unit with fewer parameters. Just like an LSTM
cell, it uses a gating mechanism to allow RNNs to efficiently learn long-range dependency by
preventing the vanishing gradient problem. The GRU consists of a reset and update gate that
determine which part of the old memory to keep vs. update with new values at the current
time step.
Figure 26.5: Original paper diagram
Figure 26.6: A more clear diagram
Summary
1. You think you need a Spatio-Temporal Fancy VideoConvNet
2. STOP. Do you really?
3. Okay fine: do you want to model:
• local motion? (use 3D CONV), or
• global motion? (use LSTM).

4. Try out using Optical Flow in a second stream (can workbetter sometimes)
5. Try out GRU-RCN! (imo best model)

Chapter 27
Attention Models
First recall RNN for Captioning. It would be better if it could look the image more than once
and focus its attention to specific parts of the image.
Soft Attention for Captioning
Figure 27.1: Soft Attention for Captioning - Xu et al, Show, Attend and Tell: Neural Image
Caption Generation with Visual Attention, ICML 2015
1. ComputethefeatureswithaCNN.Extractnotthelastonesbutfromanearlylayer. This
is way it is a grid of features and not a single vector. In this way we have information of
the localization of the input image features
2. Use this features to initialize the h0 hidden state
3. Now things get different with respect RNN for captioning. Instead of using h0 to com-
pute distribution over words, we use it to compute a prob distribution over L locations.
This would we implemented with a couple of affine layers (= FC) and softmax to give a
distribution.
131

4. We produce a weighted sum of features using the prob distribution over locations. This
can be seen as taking the feature vector and summarizing it to a vector. This gives as a
weighted features that is used to decide where to focus.
5. The next hidden state has as inputs the past hidden state and a word (like CNN) but now
we also add the weighted features.
6. The hidden state is used to produce a prob distribution over words and also a new dis-
tribution over locations. These are implemented with a couple of FC layers on top of the
hidden state.
7. Go to 4
Soft vs Hard Attention
Lets see how this summarization vectors z are produced
Figure 27.2: Soft Attention vs Hard Attention
Both soft and hard attention model produce the same output. Notice that the soft attention is
more diffuse because it is averaging prob from the image. And Hard attention it is only focusing
in one element.
Hard attention is normally faster at test time because is only focusing on an specific thing at
every step instead of looking at big regions of the image.
Figure 27.3: Example Soft Attention vs Hard Attention
Both have the same problem, they are constrained by a grid over the input image which makes
them more blurry. z is not continuous. To work in a continuous way it exists the so called
”Spatial Transformed Networks”

Recap
Soft attention:
• Easy to implement: produce distribution over input locations, reweight features and feed
as input
• Attend to arbitrary input locations using spatial transformer networks
Hard attention:
• Attend to a single input location
• Cant use gradient descent!
• Need reinforcement learning (because they are not differentiable)

Chapter 28
Spatial Transformer Networks
The use of spatial transformers results in models which learn invariance to translation, scale,
rotation and more generic warping, resulting in state-of-the-art performance on several bench-
marks, and for a number of classes of transformations.
Figure 28.1: Spatial Transformer Networks
We would like a function that given a continuous box coordinates cropped the input image.
The problem is that it is not possible to crop in a continuous way because we are constraint, at
least, by pixels.
Theideaistohaveafunctionthatmapsoutputpixelscoordtoinputpixelscoord. Thisfunction
is deferentiable w.r.t the affine parameters θ.
With this function, the network will attend to input regions by predicting θ.
They put the info explained on top row in a self contained module which they call ”Spatial
Transformer” which is divided in three parts:
• Localisation net: Outputs the affine parameters θ.
135

Figure 28.2: continious coordinates
• Grid Generator: Use θ to compute the sampling grid
• Sampler: With bilinear interpolation produces outputs.
Notice that all this modules are continuous and differentiable.
Figure 28.3: Deformation examples

Chapter 29
Famous Networks
LeNet-5
Figure 29.1: LeNet
The first successful applications of Convolutional Networks were developed by Yann LeCun in
1990s. Of these, the best known is the LeNet architecture that was used to read zip codes,
digits, etc.
AlexNet
The first work that popularized Convolutional Networks in Computer Vision was the AlexNet,
developed by Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever and Geoff Hinton. The AlexNet was submitted to
the ImageNet ILSVRC challenge in 2012 and significantly outperformed the second runner-up
(top 5 error of 16% compared to runner-up with 26% error). The Network had a very similar
architecturetoLeNet,butwasdeeper, bigger,andfeaturedConvolutionalLayersstackedontop
of each other (previously it was common to only have a single CONV layer always immediately
followed by a POOL layer). 60M parameters.
137

Figure 29.2: AlexNet. There is an error in the paper figure, the input image must be of 227
so that the rest of volumes are coherent
VGGNet
The runner-up in ILSVRC 2014 was the network from Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman
that became known as the VGGNet. Its main contribution was in showing that the depth of
the network is a critical component for good performance. Their final best network contains 16
CONV/FC layers and, appealingly, features an extremely homogeneous architecture that only
performs 3×3 convolutions and 2×2 pooling from the beginning to the end. Their pretrained
model is available for plug and play use in Caffe. A downside of the VGGNet is that it is
more expensive to evaluate and uses a lot more memory and parameters (140M). Most of these
parameters are in the first fully connected layer, and it was since found that these FC layers
can be removed with no performance downgrade, significantly reducing the number of necessary
parameters.
The most of the network parameters are in the FC layer and most of the memory required by
the network is used in the first 2 ConvLayers.
Figure 29.3: VGGNet - 7.3% top 5 error in ImageNet

GoogLeNet
The ILSVRC 2014 winner was a Convolutional Network from Szegedy et al. from Google.
Its main contribution was the development of an Inception Module that dramatically reduced
the number of parameters in the network (4M, compared to AlexNet with 60M). Additionally,
this paper uses Average Pooling instead of Fully Connected layers at the top of the ConvNet,
eliminating a large amount of parameters that do not seem to matter much. There are also
several followup versions to the GoogLeNet, most recently Inception-v4.
Figure 29.4: VGGNet - 6.7% top 5 error in ImageNet
Figure 29.5: VGGNet structure
ResNet
Let H(x) be a function that you desire to obtian. In a typical net you would compute a squence
ofstepsReLu(ReLu(xw1+b1)*w2+b2)totransformxtoH(x). Instead,inaResNetyoucompute
a delta to be added to the original input to obtain H(x).
What is nice about it is that in plain nets, gradients must flow through all the transforma-
tions. Instead, in residual nets because it is addition (distributes the gradient equally to all its

children), the gradient with flow through the (weights, ReLU) but will also skip this transfor-
mations and will go directly to the previous part and flow directly to the previous block. So the
gradients can skip all the transformations and go directly to the first layer. In this way, you can
train very fast the first layer which is doing simple statistics, and the rest of layers will learn to
add to the single in between to make it work at the end.
Figure 29.6: Plain vs Residual Net
Figure 29.7: ResNet (much more layers than the ones on the diagram)
Another way of seeing it, it that ResNets are only computing a delta on top of the identity. So
it makes it nice to optimize.
Residual Network developed by Kaiming He et al. was the winner of ILSVRC 2015. It features
specialskipconnectionsandaheavyuseofbatchnormalization. Thearchitectureisalsomissing
fully connected layers at the end of the network. ResNets are currently by far state of the art
Convolutional Neural Network models and are the default choice for using ConvNets in practice
(as of May 10, 2016). In particular, also see more recent developments that tweak the original
architecture from Kaiming He et al. Identity Mappings in Deep Residual Networks (published
March 2016). It is interesting that after the first layer they do polling (the only polling in all
the net) and they scale the input image of 244×244 to 56×56, and the net works that well.
Its crazy that all the layer (except the first one) work wit 56×56×? and even compressing the
data this much it has a high accuracy.

Figure 29.8: ResNet structure. 3.6% top 5 error in ImageNet, 152 layers, 2-3 weeks training
on 8 GPU machine, faster at test time that VGGNet
Should we add infinite layers?
In plot 1.9 it is clear that networks are getting deeper and deeper But we have to be careful.
Figure 29.9: Depth revolution
Plot 1.10 shows CIFAR-10 training error. In the left plain nets (weighted layer + ReLU) in
the right ResNet. How it is possible to get a higher training error (dashed lines) with higher
number of layers? It should not happen, the model is more complex. The explanation is that
we are still not capable of optimizing them good enough.
Figure 29.10: CIFAR-10 training error
However, ResNets always improve the test and training error.
So the answer to the question is that we should keep adding more layers but not in a naive way,
we should do it in a ResNet way

Part V
Applications
143

Chapter 30
Applications
Figure 30.1: Some applications examples
30.1 Classification
Train a classification model with softmax loss. The input is the entire image and the output
are C probabilities (one per class) of being in the image.
Figure 30.2: Classification
30.2 Classification + Localization
Goal is to find a fixed number of objects (one or many) in an image
3 easy steps recipe:
145

Figure 30.3: 1.- Train (or download) a classification model (AlexNet, VGG, GoogLeNet)
Figure 30.4: 2.- Attach a new fully-connected ”regression head” to the network to compute
bounding boxes (x,y,w,h)
Figure 30.5: 3.- Train the regression head only with SGD and L2 loss with the bounding
boxes as ground-truth.
When training the regression head there are two options: You can backpropagate only till the
regression head or the entire network. 2nd option will improve a little bit the accuracy at a
expense of higher training computation cost. If you choose option 2 you will be changing the
original Conv layers on which the classification head is trained. So there are two options. Or
you have two independent networks: the original one (Conv+classification head) and the other
one (Modified Conv+regression head). Or you train both at the same time so you will have
only one model(classification head + regression head).
The final DNN for classification + uses both heads at test time
• Classification head:
• The output are C numbers (one per class)
• Regression head:
• There are two regression heads strategies (choose one):

Figure 30.6: 4.- At test time use both heads
1. Class agnostic: Output 4 numbers (one bounding box)
2. Class specific: Output C ×4 numbers (one bounding box per class)
Notice that instead of training a regression head which outputs bounding boxes, we could have
train it to output a specific number of joints or whatever
Sliding windows (DO NOT DO THIS)
Attesttimethis(classification+regression)networkshouldbeappliedinsideaslidingwindows
at multiple scales. (This would have an enormous computation cost, we will see later that
there is a better way of doing this).
Figure 30.7: Classification + Localization - Box regression and Sliding windows diagram
Theideaistoruntheclassification+regressionnetworkinsideaslidingwindowsandatmultiple
scales. So for each windows position we obtain a cat bb (x,y,w,h) and the probability of a cat
being inside the current sliding windows position. (This would have an enormous computation
cost, we will see later that there is a better way of doing this)
Finally, wehaveobtainedmultipleboundboxesandwemustmergethemandestimatetheprob
of this final bb of containing a cat. To do so, an algorithm such us non-max suppression could
be used.
Bounding Box regression (ONLY INPUT IMAGE FIXED SIZE)
Fully connected layers can only deal with input of a fixed size, because it requires a certain
amount of parameters to ”fully connect” the input and output.

Figure 30.8: Classification + Localization - Box regression architecture
In the example network with fully-connected layers at the end, a 221∗221 image will output
a 1000 size vector of class scores. If we apply the network on a larger image, the network will
fail because of the inconsistency between the input and parameters of the first fully-connected
layer.
In other words, we would have to execute the DNN in each sliding windows position. This has
an enormous computation cost. To solve this we can transform the FC layers to Conv layers.
(see right column)
Without sliding windows (DO THIS)
Any FC layer can be converted to a CONV layer. For example, in this model, the FC layer with
K=4096 that is looking at the input volume of size 5×5×1024 can be equivalently expressed
as a CONV layer with F = 5,P = 0,S = 1,K = 4096.
In other words, we are setting the filter size to be exactly the size of the input volume, and
hence the output will simply be 1×1×4096 since only a single depth column “fits” across the
input volume, giving identical result as the initial FC layer.
Figure 30.9: Classification + Localization - Without sliding windows
FC can only deal with input of a fixed size, while convolutional layers just ”slide” the same
filters across the input, so it can basically deal with input of an arbitrary spatial size.
At train time we train with samples of the sliding windows. At test time we can evaluate input
images of higher dimension sharing computations.

Figure 30.10: ConvLayers allow input of any size in an efficient way
Forexample,inthisimage,wehavetrainedthemodelwithinputimagesizesof14×14producing
andoutputvectorof1×1×C. Attesttime, weareusinginputimagesof16×16whichproduces
and output of 2×2×C. This is equivalent to execute the model 4 times (in the four corners of
the image) like in the previous example of the cat. But instead of doing the whole computation
4times, wearesharingthecomputation, theextracomputationisonlydoneintheyellowparts.
No more sliding windows!!
30.3 Object Detection
Object detection is a harder problem than classification + localization. Now, there can be a
non fix number of instances of the same class as well as other classes. We can not use regression
with detection (as within classification) because we need variable sized outputs. So we have
to go back to sliding windows? It would be very costly to run a classification model in each
windows position. The answer is no. We will first search for tiny subsets of possible positions.
This models are called R-CNN (Region based CNN).
Evaluation. To evaluate a detection model we use ”mean average precision” (mAP). Compute
average precision (AP) separately for each class, then average over classes. A detection is a
true positive if it has a loU with a ground-truth box greater than some threshold (usually 0.5)
(mAP@0.5). Combine all detection from all test images to draw a precision / recall curve for
each class; AP is the area under the curve. mAP is a number from 0 to 100. The higher the
better.
There are two main networks used for object detection explained in previous chapters:
• R-CNN (Region Based CNN) - R-CNN, Fast R-CNN & Faster R-CNN
• YOLO (You only look once)

30.4 Segmentation
30.4.1 Semantic Segmentation
Semantic Segmentation tries to label every pixel. It does not differentiate instances (e.g. cows
are a massive compact blue mass)
Figure 30.11: Semantic Segmentation
Figure 30.12: General idea. Problem: Smaller output due to pooling. Other more complex
solutions are required
There are three common strategies used for semantic segmentation:
• Multiscale, or
• Refinement, or
• Upsampling
Multiscale
Solve problem by working in different scales and up-scaling output. In this example they are
also doing a parallel process to compute super-pixels to improve the segmentation.

Figure30.13: Farabetetal,“LearningHierarchicalFeaturesforSceneLabeling”,TPAMI2013
Figure 30.14: Pinheiro and Collobert, “Recurrent Convolutional Neural Networks for Scene
Labeling”, ICML 2014
Refinement
1. Pass the input image through a CNN which produces the low res image segmentation
(labels).
2. Rescale the inputs to the lower resolution and apply again the ConvNet to the lower
resolution input image and results from the previous segmentation
3. Goto 2 until threshold
Upsampling
Figure 30.15: Long, Shelhamer, and Darrell, “Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic
Segmentation”, CVPR 2015
They pass the input image through a CNN which produces the low res image segmentation
(labels). But with this method, they add an extra learnable layer at the end of the ConvNet

that learns to upsample the low resolution segmentation (Upsampling layer). The also do skip
connections
30.4.2 Instance Segmentation
Detect instances, give category, label pixels. simultaneous detection and segmentation (SDS).
Normally look very similar to the detection models.
Figure 30.16: Instance Segmentation
Architecture similar to R-CNN
Figure 30.17: Architecture - Hariharan et al, “Simultaneous Detection and Segmentation”,
ECCV 2014
1. External segment proposals that outputs pixels not boxes
2. Produce a BBox of the segmented region
3. Take the BBox image an run it through a CNN
4. Take the BBox image and set the non segment proposal pixels to the mean image value
of the dataset an run it through a CNN
5. Concatenate booth features an run it through a classifier
6. Refine the proposed region
Notice that this is very similar to R-CNN
For the refinement step there is a following paper that improves it (Hariharan et al, Hyper-
columns for Object Segmentation and Fine-grained Localization, CVPR 2015). The idea is that

once we have the region cropped pass it through AlexNet and extract features of various layers.
Then, upsample this feature maps and combine them together. Finally, do a logistic classifier
for each of the pixels that predicts how much likely is to be background.
Architecture similar to Faster R-CNN
Figure 30.18: Architecture-Daietal,“Instance-awareSemanticSegmentationviaMulti-task
Network Cascades”, arXiv 2015
Stuck the model in the left to ResNet. Similar to Faster R-CNN
From the high resolution feature map propose regions, then reshape boxes and finally mask
background and predict object class.
Notice that the three steps (intermediate levels of the net) can be evaluated with ground-truth.
30.5 Image captioning
Figure30.19: “DeepVisual-SemanticAlignmentsforGeneratingImageDescriptions”,Karpa-
thy and Fei-Fei
Summary
• Localization
– Find a fixed number of objects (one or many)

– L2 regression from CNN features to box coordinates
– Overfeat: Regression + efficient sliding window with FC -¿ conv conversion
– Deeper networks do better
• Object Detection
– Find a variable number of objects by classifying image regions
– Before CNNs: dense multiscale sliding window (HoG, DPM)
– Avoid dense sliding window with region proposals
– R-CNN: Selective Search + CNN classification / regression
– Fast R-CNN: Swap order of convolutions and region extraction
– Faster R-CNN: Compute region proposals within the network
– Deeper networks do better
• Semantic segmentation
– Classify all pixels
– Fully convolutional models, downsample then upsample
– Learnable upsampling: fractionally strided convolution
– Skip connections can help
• Instance Segmentation
– Detect instance, generate mask
– Similar pipelines to object detection

Bibliography
[] L. Fei-Fei, A. Karpathy, and J. Johnson. Cs231n: Convolutional neural networks for visual
recognition. URL http://cs231n.stanford.edu/index.html.
[] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep learning. Book in preparation for MIT
Press, 2016. URL http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[] D. Britz. Wildml. URL http://www.wildml.com/.
155